 ISTANBUL CITY GUIDE  
Old Istanbul is the crowded streets of the Grand Bazaar, magnificent mosques, hamams (bathouses), and grand palaces of the Ottoman Empire. Headscarved women walk down the cobbled lanes and men smoke apple tobacco from a nargileh (water pipe) to a soundtrack of the Muezzin’s call to prayer.  

New Istanbul was voted 2007 design capital by Wallpaper* magazine. It’s boutiques selling one-offs by globally recognised Turkish designers and the Cihangir districts’ clubs, bars and restaurants rival Soho. The “Istanbul Modern” – showcases Turkey’s contemporary art. In Istanbul both these worlds co-exist. It’s a vital, ever changing city, charged with energy, creativity and commerce.  

Other cities claim to be at the crossroads of Europe and Asia – but only Istanbul can legitimately claim to straddle both continents. Split by the Bosphorus the western bank of the city is in Europe whilst the eastern side is in Asia. Istanbul is surrounded on 3 sides by water – as well as the Bosphorus there is the Sea of Marmara to the south of the city, and a narrow inlet known as the Golden Horn splits the European side.  

Istanbul is one of the biggest cities in Europe – home to a population of approximately 12 million. Its numbers are swelled daily by newcomers from the provinces, travelling to the city for work. Turkey has a very young population – the average age is 29. The average age in Istanbul is even younger at 23 and some unofficial sources put it at 16. It’s also a university city, with over 150,000 students attending the 3 big universities and dozens of colleges.  

Since 1923 Ankara has been the capital of Turkey, but Istanbul has always been and continues to be the financial and commercial capital. The country’s economy is one of the fastest growing in the world and the city has quadrupled in size over the last few decades.  

Byzantium, Constantinople, Istanbul – the names which the city has been called during its 28 centuries of existence. Relics from all these periods still exist in Istanbul. During the Constantinople era which began in 330AD, many stunning palaces, fountains and monumental churches were constructed. The city was the first Christian capital of the Eastern Roman Empire and over 900 years grew to become the wealthiest most splendid city in Europe, whilst Paris and London were still squalid towns. In 1453 Ottoman Sultan Mehmet II brought an end to Constantinople, bringing Islam to the city, changing churches into mosques and renaming the city Istanbul. Mehmet the Conqueror was responsible for the Topkapi Palace and the Grand Bazaar and other grand mosques. The Ottoman Empire reached its zenith under Sultanate of Suleyman the Magnificent 1522-66.  

Timeline
666BC: Greek king Byzas establishes Byzantium.

179BC: Byzantium becomes part of the Roman Empire.

330AD: Roman Emperor Constantine builds his new capital in the city and renames it Constantinople.

1453: Ottoman Turks conquer Constantinople and name it Istanbul.

1914: Ottoman Empire sides with Germany and Austria-Hungary during World War 1.  

1923: The Independent Republic of Turkey is established, with a new capital in Ankara.  

Although over 95% of the population are Muslin, Istanbul has a long history of tolerance and multi-culturism with Jewish and Christian traditions present in the city. Islamic fundamentalists targeted the city in 2003 with Al-Qaeda bombs aimed at Jewish synagogues, the British Consulate and HSBC Bank, killing 78 people. In 2005 Turkey entered formal talks to become a member of the European Union but whilst Turkey’s dispute with Greece over Cyprus remains unresolved many believe it can’t happen.  

Districts
European Side
Sultanahmet: Sultanahmet is the district that all tourists head for. This is ancient Istanbul with all the sightseeing heavyweights packed together with must-see mosques, palaces and the Grand Bazaar. Compact and relatively traffic free compared to the rest of the city and easy to navigate around on foot.  

Eminonu and Cagaloglu: Eminonu is the transport hub of Istanbul. Cagaloglu is a warren of trade shops.

Tunel and Karakoy: Karakoy houses the city’s docks and harbour. Steep alleyways and the Genoese Galata Tower is the area’s towering landmark. Karakoy is the location for the “Istanbul Modern” contemporary art museum. Tunel takes its name from the tunnel that runs down to the sea from Istiklal Caddesi (Independence Avenue) – the first municipal underground in Europe and still in operation.  

Beyoglu and Taksim: The city’s heartland. Istiklal Caddesi (Independence Avenue) is a mile long pedestrianised grand boulevard cutting through Beyoglu. An ancient looking tram runs the length of Istiklal Caddesi. Lined with nineteenth century former palaces and embassies which are now home to High Street brands. The Avenue is just as busy at night with pavement bars and restaurants serving the tourists. It’s said that up to a million people walk up or down Istiklal Caddesi every day. The streets off Istiklal Caddesi retain their Bohemian past and are home to many interesting independent shops, cafes, bars, restaurants and clubs. Taksim square is at the heart of modern Istanbul but it’s large, busy and on the whole unappealing. Crossing the road here requires pedestrians take their life in their hands as traffic comes from every direction and doesn’t always stop at the traffic lights.  

Cihangir and Cukurcuma: Bohemian area of the city – more Soho than Istanbul. The fashionistas have moved in on the area and it’s now riding high on a property boom. Despite this the area has a friendly small-town vibe and a thriving café society.

Nisantasi and Macka: Nisantasi is the upscale, upmarket, expensive area of town. Designer and luxury boutiques – Gucci, Louis Vuitton, Armani etc; smart apartment blocks, good restaurants and people watching cafes. Abdi Ipekci Caddesi is a leafier version of Bond Street. The area doesn’t attract many tourists – rather it’s Istanbul’s super rich who come to shop.  

Ortakoy and Besiktas: Besiktas is the grander of these 2 Bosphorus-based Suburbs, with a concentration of shoreline Ottoman palaces and pavilions. In the summer the waterfront of Ortakoy becomes party central, crowded with locals enjoying the bars, restaurants and super-clubbing venues.  

Levent and Etiler: The financial heartland – lined with corporate skyscrapers and large financial institutions. Wealthy, with imposing villas glimpsed behind security fencing. Levent is the stomping ground of Istanbul’s rich and famous. This is the location of Turkey’s largest shopping mall – the Akmerkez, which was named best shopping centre in Europe in the mid 90s.  

Asian Side  
Uskudar and Kadikoy: Residential suburbs for those who work mainly on the European side, and make the daily commute by ferry across the Bosphorus. Not many tourists visit but locals flock to the bazaar in Kadikoy and to one of the city’s best street markets on Kusdili Sokak on Tuesdays for food and clothes, and on Sundays for the flea market.  

The Big Sights
The top 5 are all in Sultanahmet – the ancient quarter of Istanbul.

1. Aya Sofya (Hagia Sophia - The Church of the Divine Wisdom)  
This originally Christian basilica, is Istanbul’s finest site. Vast interior, stunning mosaics and a towering dome. The present building is the third to stand on the site. The first was built in AD360 during the reign of Constantius, but after flood and earthquake damage it was rebuilt many times until this final structure was completed in 537. For a thousand years this was the largest building in the world. When Ottoman Mehmet II conquered the city in 1453 his first act was to declare Aya Sofya a mosque. Apart from removing some of the marble crosses and whitewashing the mosaic icons he left the church as it was. The 4 Islamic minarets which now stand at the corners were added after the Turkish conquest. In 1935 Aya Sofya was declared a museum and is the most visited site in the country with more than 2 million visitors a year.  

Address: Aya Sofya Meydani, Sultanahmet

Tel: (0212) 522 1750

Opening: 9am - 7.30pm (Closed Tue)

Admission: Charge

2. Topkapi Palace  
For 400 years this pavilion palace was the residence of the Ottoman sultans who were the most powerful empire rulers in the world. Built by Mehmet the Conqueror shortly after his conquest in 1453, both as his command centre and as his indulgent home. The Palace is a city within a city consisting of interconnecting courts and between 5,000 and 7,000 people worked and lived inside to serve the sultan household. The Harem alone had 300 rooms – just 40 are open to the public.  

Address: Bab-I Humayun Caddesi, Gulhane, Sultanahmet

Tel: (0212) 512 0480

Website: www.topkapisarayi.gov.tr

Opening: 9am - 7pm (Closed Tue)

Admission: Charge

3. The Blue Mosque
One of the most magnificent mosques in the Muslim world it takes its name from the blue iznik tiles which line its walls. Built during the reign of Sultan Ahmet (1603 – 1617) with 6 minarets, which at the time was a cause of controversy as only Mecca – the holiest site in Islam also had six. There is a stunning vast central dome.

Address: Sultanahmet Camii, At Meydani Sokak 17

Tel: (0212) 518 1319

Opening hours: 5.30am - 7pm (7 days a week, closed during Prayer times)

Admission: Free (donations welcomed)

4. The Grand Bazaar (Covered Bazaar)
Istanbul’s famed emporium. The heart of the Bazaar dates from the Ottoman conquest of 1456-61 and is a labyrinth of passageways and corridors with 64 streets, 3,000 shops, 22 entrances and 25,000 employees. It’s tourists who shop and barter here rather than locals. There is a huge range of goods including jewellery, antiques, leather goods, ceramics – and of course the infamous carpets.  

Address: Kapali Carsi, Beyazit

Tel: (0212) 522 3173

Website: www.kapalicarsi.org.tr

Opening: 8.30am – 7pm (Closed Sunday)

Admission: Free

5. Suleymaniye Mosque
This mosque dominates the ancient city skyline – standing on the highest hill. The mosque was the crowning achievement of the Ottoman superstar chief architect - Mimar Sinan, who designed a vast number of buildings in Istanbul. Commissioned by Suleyman the Magnificent and completed in 1557 when the Ottoman Empire was at its height, as an Islamic answer to the Byzantine Aya Sofya. It’s the interior which is most impressive with a vast central dome and tiered domes surrounding it.  

Address: Tiryakiler Carsisi, Off Prof Siddik Sami Onar Caddesi, Suleymaniye

Opening: 9am - 7pm daily

Admission: Free

Eating & Drinking
There is never a problem finding somewhere to eat and drink in Istanbul – from the street vendors selling grilled corn on the cob, simit (savoury bread with sesame seeds), and fresh grilled fish on the harbour – to the cafes and restaurants on almost every corner.  

Low-cost traditional Turkish “meyhanes” (tavernas) serve “mezes” – small dishes of starters and dips, usually cold. Boreks are another traditional Turkish snack – a savoury pastry filled with anything from cheese or vegetables or meat. Dolmas are stuffed – usually peppers or vine leaves. And of course there are grilled meat kebabs. The district of Kumkapi on the Sea of Marmara, close to Sultanahmet, is packed with lively harbourside seafood restaurants and meyhanes.  

Traditional non-alcoholic drinking can be tea – herbal or straight – served in small tulip-shaped glasses – never with milk but always with sugar. Everyone you visit offers you a glass and it’s considered rude to refuse. Turkish coffee is black and very strong in tiny cups. Turkish wines are fine – but wine is generally expensive in restaurants. The stronger stuff is raki – an aniseed-flavour clear spirit that turns cloudy when water is added.  

The centuries-old tradition of smoking apple flavoured tobacco through a narghile (a hubble-bubble waterpipe) is kept alive in coffee houses. One guide-book fixture is Erenler Narghile – one of the oldest and most famous, located in an Ottoman building in Sultanahmet, packed with students from the nearby university. Narghile smoking has fairly recently had a revival and become popular with young Istanbulites – male and female.  

There is no shortage of uber-stylish restaurants and bars serving international and fusion cuisine to Istanbul’s style conscious.  

Venue Highlights
360: A modern glass-sided penthouse sitting on the roof of a 19th-century building on Istiklal Caddesi - which does what it says on the tin: stunning 360-degree views of the surrounding Beyoglu district and the Bosphorus. Popular with both visitors and locals, it’s a bar, restaurant and lounging spot serving up a global fusion menu to beautiful people.

Location: Misir Apartmenti, Istiklal Caddesi 311, Beyoglu

Tel: (0212) 251 1042

Opening: Lunch Mon-Fri, Dinner daily  

Changa: One of the pioneers of south-east Asian and European fusion, Changa is still top dog. Despite being on an unlovely street – Siraselviler Caddesi – it has an imposing entrance into a beautiful art nouveau building. The owners have also more recently opened Muzedechanga on Istiklal Caddesi – an equally stylish sequel with 60s and 70s interior.  

Location: Siraselviler Caddesi 87, Taksim

Tel: (0212) 249 1348

Opening: 6pm-1am Mon-Sat

Vogue: This bar/restaurant has been going for 10 years and is now an Istanbul cool institution. Drinks are served on the 13th-floor terrace overlooking Besiktas Plaza, and there’s a top-notch sushi bar.

Location: Spor Caddesi 92, BJK Plaza A Blok 13, Akaretler, Besiktas

Tel: (0212) 227 4404

Opening: Mon-Sat 12pm-3am, Sun 11am-11pm

Kiyi: Eating out at the fish restaurants that line both sides of the Bosphorus is a summer-time must for Istanbulites. Kiyi is the five-star pick, with pavement tables and views over a picturesque mini harbour in Tarabya.

Location: Kefelikoy Caddesi 126, Tarabya

Tel: (0212) 262 0002 / 269 6920

Opening: noon-midnight  

Ulus 29: On a hill overlooking the Bosphorus in the leafy surroundings of Ulus Park – great location, but a fair taxi ride from the centre. The 29 in the name refers to the 29 traditional Ottoman and east Mediterranean dishes on the menu. Cocktails are served on the terrace with great sea views. Next door is Club 29.  

Location: 1 Kireçhane Sokak, Adnan Saygun Caddesi, Ulus Park

Tel: (0212) 265 6181

Bars & Clubs
The district of Beyoglu is heaven for bar hopping. Avoid the main avenue – Istiklal Caddesi – and head for the side streets off the main drag which are packed with watering holes. In the summer Istanbul is party central and the club scene is booming. The waterfront district of Ortakoy is the place for “superclubs” which party until dawn.  

Europe’s most celebrated dance DJs stop off in Istanbul. Partying doesn’t get started until after midnight and the best time to be there is between 1am and 4am. Weekends are the busiest – but some clubs have special nights on Wednesdays and Thursdays. New venues surface all the time - these are some of the established clubs:  

Crystal: Electronic and techno. Weekends packed, Thursdays are relaxed with house sounds.  

Location: Muallim Naci Caddesi 65, Ortakoy

Tel: (0212) 278 4578

Opening: Midnight-5.30am Thur-Sat

Cahide On5: Kitsch interior and transvestite staff. Cocktails are served up to a camp pop soundtrack.

Location: 193 Mesrutiyet Caddesi, Beyoglu

Tel: (0212) 292 7368

Opening: 9.30pm-4am Tue-Sat

Reina: Istanbul’s most famous club. A swanky “superclub” with paparazzi lined up outside to snap the C-list celebs and playboys and girls who arrive in sports cars or speedboats. Turkish and euromed pop soundtrack. Drinks are very expensive.  

Location: Muallim Naci Caddesi 44

Tel: (0212) 259 5918

Opening: Mon-Sun

Anjelique: Another chic “superclub” – but not as exclusive as Reina. Resident and guest DJs and stunning views of the Bosphorus.

Location: Muallim Naci Cad, Salhane Sok, No:5, Ortakoy

Tel: (0212) 327 2844

Opening: 6pm-4am

Blackk: Istanbul’s Euro trash 5-star nightclub with black banquettes, huge glitter balls and gold chain mail curtains.

Location: Muallim Naci Cad, No: 71, Ortakoy

Tel: (0212) 236 7256

One-off raves and festivals are popular throughout the summer and are held at the Maslak Venue in the Maslak district, or at Yeni Melek – a concert and party venue in Beyoglu. During the summer parties move out of town to Solar Beach or Burc Beach on the Black Sea coast.  

Arts & Entertainment  
Turkish pop and rock is popular and can be heard on radio station Power FM and in bars and clubs. Istanbul will be one of 3 European Cities of Culture in 2010.  

Music  
Many of Istanbul’s live music venues are on the back streets which run off Istiklal Caddesi in Beyoglu.  

Babylon: An underground brick vault, this is Istanbul’s best live music venue. Electronica, jazz, international and world music can be heard here.

Location: Sehbender Sokak 3, Tunel

Tel: (0212) 292 7368

Opening: Tue-Sat

Mojo: The place for head-banging rock. Cover bands play rock classics from midnight.

Location: Buyukparmakkapi Sokak 26 off Istiklal Caddesi

Tel: (0212) 243 2927 / 243 2991

Opening: 10pm-4am daily

Peyote: Alternative sounds. Spread over several floors – with a small performance area for live local bands.

Location: Kalyoncu Kullugu Caddesi 42, off Nevizade Sokak, Beyoglu

Tel: (0212) 251 4398

Opening: Midnight-4am daily

Riddim: A mix of genres – one floor is hip hop, one rock and another R&B.

Location: Siraselviler Caddesi 69/1, Taksim

Tel: (0212) 251 2723

Opening: 9pm-4am daily

Belly Dancing
Beloved of package tourists, a belly dancing and harem show can be booked at the Galata Tower. Belly dancing originated in Egypt rather than Turkey, but can be traced back to the days of the Sultans, when both men and women danced for the Sultan’s entertainment. Male belly dancers still perform in Istanbul. There is a thriving transvestite and transsexual community in Istanbul and drag queens work in clubs like Cahide On5 in Beyoglu.  

Location: Galata Tower, Galata Square

Tel: (0212) 293 8180

Opening: 9am-8pm

Admission: Charge

Shopping & Fashion  
With dozens of independent stores, state of the art shopping malls and bazaars and markets there is plenty of choice and competition. Big names are Mavi Jeans – the equivalent of Levis, and Beymen Department stores. Fashion is a big deal in Istanbul and Turkey is the 4th largest exporter of ready-made garments in the world. Turkish furniture designers such as Derin Design and Gaia & Gino are already stars.  

The Grand Bazaar
Deli Kizin Yeri: 82 Halicilar Cad, Grand Bazaar, Tel: (0212) 526 1251. Deli Kiz means “crazy lady” – the name given to this shop in the Grand Bazaar by owner American Linda Caldwell. The shop has built a thriving business by re-inventing traditional Turkish handicrafts. Linda sells place mats, handbags, pillows and dolls all with Turkish motifs to both tourists and locals.  

Ethicon: Kapalicarsi Takkeciler Sok 58-60, Grand Bazaar. Short for ethnic contemporary. The owner creates “fusion” carpets created from bits of rugs and other materials. The rugs and kilims are ethically produced using environmentally friendly processes.  

Beyoglu District  
Many American and European brands manufacture their clothing in Turkey and Istanbul now has a thriving market in seconds and overruns which can be bought at shops in Beyoglu. Off Istiklal Caddesi are several pasajs – covered arcades - stacked with knock-down clothes in bins or on rails. This is also the place to track down fake copies of well known brands.  

Atlas Pasaji: Off Istiklal Caddesi, Beyoglu. Similar to Camden Market in London – with a grungy vibe. As well as clothes it sells jewellery and kitsch collectibles.

Beyoglu Is Merkezi: Beyoglu Is Merkezi 365, off Istiklal Caddesi, Beyoglu. A large pasaj with 3 underground floors. Bargains here are sporty lines and denim.  

Cihangir and Cukurcuma District  
These are the original Bohemian districts with a Soho feel.  

Evihan: Altipatlar Sokak 8, Cukurcuma, Tel: (0212) 227 2216. The owner combines fragments of Iznik tile and silver to produce hand-made accessories, beaded glass ornaments, delicate one-off clothes, handbags and shoes.  

Suzanne Simon: Faikpasa Yokusu 1, Cukurcuma, Tel: (0212) 244 9663. Suzanne Simon is an American textile designer inspired by the embroidered Ottoman textiles. Previously she worked for Turkish fashion house Vakko – now her products are sold to high-end designer stores like Barneys in New York.  

Mine Kerse: Faik Pasa Yokusu, Tel: (0212) 249 3561. Former assistant to well known Turkish designer Umit Unal, Mine Kerse produces beautifully crafted hats and handbags from felt and leather from her studio above the shop.  

Pied de Poule: Faik Pasa Yokusu 19/1, Tel: (0212) 245 8116. Vintage fashion from the 30s – including gloves, hats, handbags as well as furniture.  

Bis Wear: Aznavur Pasaji 212-213, Galatasaray, Cukurcuma, Tel: (0212) 292 9700. Owned by 2 sisters – who started making hats from unusual fabrics and who branched out into matching shoes, handbags and belts.  

Nisantasi District  
This is the upmarket designer exclusive shopping district.  

Ayca: Atiye Sokak 7/8, Tesvikiye 34367, Tel: (0212) 219 2511. Ayca is a showroom on the 2nd floor of an apartment building – but that doesn’t deter those who wish to snap up Ayca’s colourful surreal designs. Ayca is a fashion designer who has studied at St Martins in London. She designs jewellery and paints her dreams on canvas. Instead of curtains the windows are covered with white painted Barbie dolls.  

Ottoman Empire: Sakayik Sokak 59/1, Tesvikiye, Tel: (0212) 296 5619. The owners produce t-shirts by taking Ottoman motifs and adding English phrases and pop designs. Tiny shop on the ground floor of an apartment building.  

City’s: Tesvikiye Street, Nisantasi, Tel: (0212) 373 3333. This is one of Istanbul’s newest malls – with liveried door staff and a huge screen outside which blasts Fashion TV into the street below.

Etiler, Ulus & Levent Districts
These districts are home to some of Istanbul’s biggest and best malls and a great clothing bazaar.

Akmerkez: Alisveris Merkezi, Nispetiye Caddesi, Etiler. Upmarket slick mall with 250 shops.

Cevahir: Buyukdere Cad no.22, Sisli. Over 6 floors this is Europe’s biggest mall. The most popular of Istanbul’s 40 or so malls and always crowded.

Kanyon: Buyukdere Cad, Levent. The Kanyon mall – designed to be like a canyon! A sophisticated upmarket mall with Harvey Nicks, and Wagamama.  

Sport & Leisure  
Football  
Only one sport counts in Istanbul and that’s football. There are 3 teams who play in the city – Besiktas, Fenerbahce and Galatasaray who dominate the Turkish league season (Aug – May). Almost every male in Turkey supports one of the big Istanbul 3 – no matter where he lives – with his local team coming second choice. Basketball is also popular.  

Turkish Baths  
Taking to the water in a Turkish bath (hamam) is a century-old tradition in Istanbul. Cemberlitas Hamami is right in the heart of the ancient quarter in Sultanahmet. It has been a bathhouse since the 16th century and is now mostly visited by tourists rather than locals, but it’s an architectural treasure. Full of marble domes, the baths were designed by Ottoman architect superstar Mimar Sinan. Clients are soaped, scrubbed, massaged and washed down by attendants in single-sex sections of the baths. None of the hamams are officially gay but there are several unofficial male-only gay local hamams across Istanbul.  

Location: Cemberlitas Hamami, Vezirhan Caddesi 8, Cemberlitas

Tel: (0212) 522 7974

Opening: 6am – midnight daily  

Media  
The daily English language newspaper is Turkish Daily News and there is a monthly Turkish Business World. The monthly Time Out Istanbul is good for reviews and up-to-date listings. There is also a bi-monthly listings guide called Istanbul: The Guide.  

Radio: The airwaves in the city are crammed with radio stations. Stations usually offer Turkish or English language music. For dance and pop there’s Kiss FM, Metro FM or Power FM. For Turkish music there’s Kral FM, Lokum FM and Best FM.  

TV: There are over 100 channels and Turkey has its own music channel - Power Turk – which plays exclusively Turkish music. There is also MTV Turkey.

Practical Stuff
Safety and Scams
Pickpockets operate in the areas around Taksim and other busy tourist areas. Care should be taken with wallets, bags and mobile phones. If approached by anyone asking you for money – in particular young men, who can be glue or thinner addicts – be careful if you revoke them: don’t be aggressive or shout or push them as this can provoke retaliation. Instead, either give them small change, without letting them see that you have more money, or refuse politely.

Passports & Visas
Your passport should be valid for at least six months on entry into Turkey. A visa is required for British nationals to enter Turkey which can be bought by British citizens at the airport on entry to Turkey for ten pounds. Do this before you join the long queue for passport control – otherwise you’ll have to queue up twice!  

Local Laws and Customs  
Turkey has strict laws against the use, possession or trafficking of illegal drugs. If you are convicted of any of these offences, you can expect to receive a heavy fine or a prison sentence of four to 24 years.  

It is illegal not to carry some form of photographic ID in Turkey. It is therefore advisable to carry a photocopy of your passport with you at all times, storing the original in a safe place.  

Do not take photographs near military or official installations.  

Dress modestly if visiting a mosque or a religious shrine. Visitors should remove their shoes and women should cover their heads and arms, and not wear shorts or miniskirts.  

If offered a glass of tea it is considered rude to refuse.  

It is an offence to insult the Turkish nation or the national flag, or to deface or tear up currency.  

The export of antiquities is prohibited and carries a prison sentence from five to ten years.  

Tipping  
In cheaper restaurants it’s not necessary to leave more than a few coins in the change plate. In an average restaurant although tipping is not compulsory, people leave around 5%. In more expensive restaurants, 10% is usual. Taxis don’t expect a tip but it’s usual to round up the change to the nearest lira.  

Water & Money
Water: It is recommended that you drink bottled water.

Money: Turkey’s currency is the Turkish Lira.

Exchange Rates (Estimated for indication purposes only):

1 USD = 2.92 Lira | 5 USD = 14.62 Lira | 10 USD = 29.23 Lira

1 Euro = 3.26 Lira | 5 Euro = 16.31 Lira | 10 Euro = 32.62 Lira

1 GBP = 4.24 Lira | 5 GBP = 21.20 Lira | 10 GBP = 42.40 Lira

The New Turkish Lira comes in notes of 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100. The New Kuruş comes in coins of 5, 10, 25, 50 and one New Turkish Lira. One hundred New Kuruş equals one New Turkish Lira.  

With a credit or debit card you can withdraw local currency from cash machines. There are also cash machines in the arrivals halls at most airports. Credit cards are widely accepted in hotels, restaurants and shops.  

The Euro is highly valued as a form of payment (far more than the dollar), and can be used to pay for large purchases or services - e.g. of a tour guide.  

Cost of Living & Sample Prices  
Minimum wage: TL608 a month – approximately £260 a month

Blue collar average: £350 - £500 a month

White collar average: £450 - £750 a month

Professional/highly skilled: £900 - £3000 a month

Price Guide (TL):
Small bottle of water: 1.30

Movie ticket: 4.00 - 10.00

Nightclub entry: 5.00 - 30.00

Hamam bath and massage: 10.00 - 60.00

Bosphorus ferry ride: 1.50 (one way)

Café latte: 4.00

Local Information
Time: GMT+2 hours (summer)

Sunrise & Sunset (Mid June): Sunrise: 05:30 | Sunset: 20:35

Weather: In summer the weather in Istanbul is hot and humid, the temperature between June and September averaging 82°F (28°C). Summers are relatively dry, but rain does occur all year round. During winter it is cold, wet and often snowy. Snowfalls tend to be heavy, but temperatures rarely drop as low as freezing point. Istanbul also tends to be a windy city.  

Dialling Codes
The international country dialling code from the UK for Turkey is +90. The outgoing code from Turkey to the UK is 00, followed by the relevant country code (e.g. 0044 for the United Kingdom).

Within Istanbul:

Asya (Asia side): 0216

Avrupa (Europe side): 0212

If dialling within the European side to a European number from a landline, drop the 0212 code. If dialling within the Asian side to an Asian number from a landline, drop the 0216 code.

To dial an Istanbul number from a mobile, use the prefixes 0212 for Europe and 0216 for Asia.

Electricity & Working Hours
Electricity: 220 Volt, 50 Hz (2-prong round pin plugs).

Government Offices: 8:30 am - 12:30 pm; 1:30 pm - 5:30 pm (Closed Sat & Sun)

Banks: 8:30 am - 12:00 pm; 1:30 pm - 5:00 pm (Closed Sat & Sun)

Shops: 9:30 am - 7:00 pm (In busy tourist areas some close around midnight)

Public Transport & Taxis
Traffic: Istanbul traffic is a major problem and often experiences gridlock particularly on the bridges. Fortunately the 2 busiest areas for visitors – Sultanahmet and Beyoglu – are easy to get around on foot.

Buses & Metro: There are numerous private and state-owned city buses but because of traffic jams they can be slow and uncomfortable with services coming to a virtual halt at 11pm. Buses are useful for heading up the Bosphorus coast to Ortakoy. To travel from the European side to the Asian side it’s best to travel by ferry (docks along Eminönü Quay). To travel to Nisantasi, Etiler and Levent, use the metro line running north from Taksim.

Tramways: Two tramways operate on the European side. A quick, modern commuter tram runs from Kabatas through Eminönü, Sultanahmet, Beyazit and onto outlying suburbs.

Tickets: Bus, metro, ferry and tram tickets are cheap and available near main stops. An Akbil (electronic token) is available for purchase in advance for multiple journeys.

Taxis: Yellow taxis can be hailed on the street. Insist on the meter being used (night rate 2400-0600 is 50% higher; check for 'Gündüz' [day] or 'Gece' [night]). Day rate is around TL1.50 a mile.

Dolmuş: Large, yellow shared minibus taxis running fixed circular routes (e.g., Taksim-Besiktas). Smaller blue minibuses serve longer journeys across city suburbs.

Driving: Hire cars are not recommended due to heavy traffic and parking shortages.