İSTANBUL
visitor’s guide
ESTABLISHED IN 1997 THE
ISTANBUL CONVENTION &
VISITORS BUREAU – ICVB IS
A NON-PROFIT DESTINATION
MARKETING ORGANIZATION.
ICVB’s main goal is to represent Istanbul
around the world and to seek international associations and corporations planning to hold
high-profile international congresses and
events. ICVB has played a key role in Istanbul’s
rapid rise of popularity as a congress destination according to the ICCA statistics. Thus
reassuring the significance of Istanbul’s 8,500
year of history as well as professional services
offered by the city’s tourism industry and professional solutions offered by ICVB’s strategies.
ICVB members include the leading corporations and associations involved in the
conference and incentive tourism such as
hotels, conference and exhibition centers,
DMC & PCOs, airlines and other companies. The ICVB, working in close collaboration with The Turkish Ministry of Culture
& Tourism, The Istanbul Chamber of Commerce and The Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality; designs and implements special
events and other marketing strategies to
raise Istanbul as a congress and event center.

ICVB SERVICES
BID SUPPORT
VENUE FINDING
CONSULTING & ADVICE
SITE INSPECTIONS
PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS
DESTINATION MARKETING

Istanbul Convention & Visitors Bureau

İstanbul Ticaret Odası Ek Hizmet Binası
Reşadiye Cad. No: 7 Eminönü 34112 İstanbul - Turkey


UNIQUE ISTANBUL
EXPERIENCES
If you have a connecting international flight in Istanbul with a
layover between 6-24 hours, you can join our free Touristanbul
service to discover this unique city.

turkishairlines.com/touristanbul

The Istanbul Chamber of Commerce was founded and held its first meeting in 1882
which proved a milestone for both Turkey and the private industry. The chamber
has almost half a million members and it is the 2nd biggest Chamber of Commerce
of Europe. The ICOC has 81 Professional Committees and 603 Committee Members
/ 261 Assembly Members. Aware of its social responsibility and as a broad-based
NGO, the ICOC is a strong advocate of trade and the free market, the uncompromising principles of economic and political stability. In line with these principles,
its pioneering and model activities are essential to its mission. The ICOC has always
guided the Turkish private industry and society with its projects and initiatives.
The ICOC operates with the vision of increasing the share of its members in international trade and encourages rapid development and expansion of trade,
small-scale industry, and service sectors, strives to develop new overseas markets,
and organizes trade shows. It informs the public and helps maintain professional ethics and solidarity and cooperates with all kinds of public and private, professional, scientific, social, and cultural entities. The ICOC contributes to the formulation of legislation via mediation of the members’ opinion to the authorities
in concern, issues more than half of the foreign trade documents of the whole
country and organizes the national participation of roughly 30 international fairs.
Members of various occupational committees meet at ICOC and review current
issues confronting their respective sectors. ICOC helps foreign investors get acquainted with company establishment procedures in Turkey. Assisting foreign direct
investors, center provides access to information and services and carries out the
company establishment and registration procedures quickly. It also provides investors information about the investment subsidies offered by the government. ICOC
organizes “Study Visits” and “Regional Trade Delegations” for target markets, Turkish
Product Fairs, and trade shows subject to national participation, to increase export
figures, find out new markets, and lay down the foundations of future partnerships
abroad. In order to attract new foreign investors, ICOC provides a meeting ground
for leading firms of Turkey and global investors. It arranges Round Tables and B2B
Meetings which provide a venue to facilitate bilateral business meetings, cooperation, and investments. Within the framework of its lobbying efforts, ICOC represents
the Chamber in international activities including seminars, conferences and forums.

Travel Agencies

Istanbul Visitor’s Guide is published by Küçük Mucizeler on behalf of ICVB.
Istanbul Convention & Visitors Bureau İstanbul Ticaret Odası Ek Hizmet Binası
Reşadiye Cad. No:7 Eminönü 34112 İstanbul Turkey
P: (+90 212) 522 55 55 F:(+90 212) 522 01 01 / www.icvb.org / istanbul@icvb.org

www.kucukmucizeler.com


President’s
Message

Turkish poet described Istanbul as “A piece of diamond
in between two seas”. Indeed, Istanbul is an image
of a unique natural beauty. There isn’t another city in
the world which is divided into two parts by a sea and
was the capital of three different emperorships for 1593
consecutive years.
East and West, not only as directions but also as civilizations
and culture, and the continents of Europe and Asia gather
in Istanbul. This is the city where Mediterranean and Black
Sea meets. That’s why, being in Istanbul means watching
mythological heroes and Byzantine and Turkish leaders
who wrote history in the cool winds of Bosphorus.
“Spectacular city” Istanbul is greeting the visitors with
its glory and power of 8500 years. This city carries the
wisdom of 85 centuries of all generations.
In every corner of Istanbul, you will find a mark of a
different era of history. Everyone always feels at home in
Istanbul, it has been a home for anyone who wanted to
live in it. Famous traveler Edmondo de Amicis embarks
on a journey with the love of Istanbul and when he finally
sees the city, he says:

“I wouldn’t trade the whole empire for a single glance
on Istanbul”.
When you come to Istanbul, you will explore the true
meaning of these words. I hope this guide will help you
out in your exploration of this magnificent city…

Şekib AVDAGİÇ

President
Istanbul Chamber of Commerce
Istanbul Convention and Visitors Bureau


HISTORY

Historical
Places
of Istanbul

Bringing Europe and Asia together, Istanbul is
the historical and cultural
capital of Turkey.



Did you know


Famous writer Agatha
Christie’s 1934 novel
“Murder on the Orient
Express” was written in
the Pera Palace Hotel
in Istanbul.



For ages, the city of Istanbul hosted countless cultures and civilizations and acted as the capital of various ruling
empires. Istanbul has a lot unique qualities with its history, economic value, geographical location and culture. It
is definitely a “must-see destination” for all kinds of travelers and a financial center for global brands. Once-proud
Constantinople’s history is marvelous and memorable.
Rumor has it, that even the establishment of Istanbul began with a myth. Byzas, son of King Nisos of Megara,
wants to build a new city. He consults an oracle about the location. The oracle says “You will build your city right
across the city of the blind.” Byzas gets confused but thinks about this prophecy. He arrives to Sarayburnu and sees
Chalcedon, the district which is known as Kadıköy now. He can’t help but say “How did they not see the obvious
value of this place? People of Chalcedon must have been blind…” After that, he remembers what the oracle said and
becomes the eponymous founder of Byzantium.



HISTORY

Considered as a global city, Istanbul was
the European Capital of Culture in 2010.



Istanbul is known as the
City on the Seven Hills.
The city has inherited
this denomination from
Byzantine Constantinople
which – consciously
following the model of
Rome – was built on seven
hills too.

The city’s biggest attraction is its historic
center, the historical peninsula,
and it is partially listed as a UNESCO
World Heritage Site.

Istanbul’s history dates back to
6th millennium BCE. It is thought
that people used to live around the
Küçükçekmece Lake during the
Neolithic and Chalcolithic eras.
Tools dating back to the Lower
Palaeolithic Era were excavated in
Dudullu, while some dating back
to the Middle Palaeolithic Era and
the Upper Palaeolithic Era were
discovered around Ağaçlı. Ruins
dating back to the Neolithic Period
(6500 BC) were discovered during
the excavations of the Marmaray
immersed tube tunnel, some
dating back to the Bronze Age
(5500-3500 BC) were discovered
in Fikirtepe while some ruins were
discovered in Kadıköy dating back
to the Phoenicians.
Istanbul’s history can be divided
into 3 parts: the Byzantine period,
the Ottoman period and the
current Republic period. The
Byzantine period started in 324
and continued until 1453. In 330,
Constantinople was proclaimed
the capital of the Roman Empire.
During most of the Middle Ages,
the latter part of the Byzantine
era, Constantinople was the
largest and wealthiest city on
the European continent and at
times the largest in the world. In
1453, after an eight-week siege
Sultan Mehmed II “the Conqueror” 
captured Constantinople and
declared it the new capital of the
Ottoman Empire. The conquest of
Constantinople became a legend
and an inspiration to countless
books and movies. Istanbul
acted as the capital of Ottoman
Empire until October 29th, 1923.
On that day, the Grand National
Assembly of Turkey declared
the establishment of the Turkish
Republic, with Ankara as its capital.
Even now, every single street
of Istanbul has some pieces of
Ottoman and Byzantine Empires.
The city is living and breathing
with its thousands-of-years-long
history. It is the capital of history
and culture and the heart of
civilizations.
During the conquest of
Constantinople, it is rumored
that the Ottomans and Sultan
Mehmet moved the ships over
land. Sultan Mehmet was 21 years
old when he conquered this city
and was a genius statesman and
a military leader who was also
interested in literature, fine arts
and monumental architecture. He
was educated by famous scholar
Aksemseddin and according
to Ottoman historians he was
speaking 7 languages fluently.


HISTORY

Hippodrome of Constantinople:
Sultanahmet Square

If you are getting ready to visit
Istanbul, no doubt your first
address should be Sultanahmet
Square. The square is also known
as the “Hippodrome” and “Horse
Square”. Sultan Ahmed Mosque,
Hagia Sophia, Topkapı Palace
and Basilica Cistern, some of
the most known touristic spots
of Istanbul, are all within the
borders of Hippodrome. The
region has many touristic hotels,
cafes, restaurants and shops and
provides an entertaining and
dynamic energy to tourists. The
square was called “Horse Square”
during the Ottoman period
because the word hippodrome
comes from the word hippos
(horse) and dromos (path or way).
Throughout the Byzantine period
and even before those times,
the square was the light of social
life and used for horse racing
and chariot racing. Although the
structures do not exist anymore,
if you look carefully, you can still
see the remnants of the giant
hippodrome. It is possible that
much more of the Hippodrome’s
remains still lie beneath the
parkland of Sultanahmet Square.


In the entrance of the glorious
hippodrome, there used to be
4 horse statues. Today, you
can see them in front of St
Mark’s Basilica because they
got stolen during the Latin
invasion.


Istanbul’s Peaceful and Harmonious
Beauty: Sultan Ahmed Mosque

When one tries to describe
the allure and beauty of the
Sultan Ahmed Mosque “the Blue
Mosque”, it feels like there are no
words good enough… The mosque
and its atmosphere trigger so many
emotions and change the nature of
every single person who sets his or
her foot inside.
The mosque was constructed
between 1609 and 1616 during
the rule of Sultan Ahmed I and it is
one of the most precious pieces of
Turkish – Islamic architecture.



The architect of the Sultan
Ahmed Mosque is Sedefkâr
Mehmed Ağa, who was a
student of the Ottoman
architect Mimar Sinan.

The mosque was the primary
imperial mosque of The Ottoman
Empire and has five main domes,
six minarets and eight secondary
domes. The hand-painted blue
tiles of the mosque’s interior walls
are well-known internationally and
that’s why the mosque is also called
as the Blue Mosque. At its lower
levels and at every pier, the interior
of the mosque is lined with more
than 20,000 handmade İznik style
ceramic tiles which have more than
60 different tulip designs. The tiles
symbolize peace and happiness. In
the lower area the mosque has 200
stained glass windows. The dome
and ceiling decorations of the
mosque are also very remarkable. In
1985, the mosque was added into
Historic Areas of Istanbul - UNESCO
World Heritage Centre list.
Besides being one of the most
popular tourist attractions of
Istanbul, it is also a working mosque
and is therefore closed to tourists
during prayer time. Don’t forget
to see this breath-taking historical
building which is one of the most
majestic mosques in the world!



Heart and Soul of Ottoman Empire: Topkapı Palace

Topkapı Palace was the main
residence and administrative &
educational headquarters of the
Ottoman Empire for 400 years
and had the honor of witnessing
many intriguing and authentic
moments of the emperorship.
The palace complex is located on
the Seraglio Point (Sarayburnu)
and overlooks the Golden Horn,
where the Bosphorus meets the
Marmara Sea. The terrain is hilly
and the palace itself is located at
one of the highest points close to
the sea.
The construction was ordered by
Sultan Mehmed the Conqueror
and continued between the years
of 1460 and 1478. The palace
complex consists of four main
courtyards and many smaller
buildings. Female members of the
Sultan’s family lived in the “harem”,
and leading state officials,
including the Grand vizier, held
meetings in the Imperial Council
building. In the early 1850s, the
palace became inadequate based
on the requirements of state
ceremonies and protocol, and so
the sultans moved to Dolmabahçe
Palace, located on the Bosphorus.
Following the end of the Ottoman
Empire in 1923, Topkapı was
transformed into a museum by the

government in 1924.
The Topkapı Palace complex has
hundreds of rooms and chambers,
including the Ottoman Imperial
Harem and the treasury, called
“hazine” where the Spoonmaker’s
Diamond and Topkapi Dagger
are on display. The museum
collection includes many
precious pieces of Ottoman
architecture and art, and also
Ottoman clothing, weapons,
armor, miniatures, religious relics,
and illuminated manuscripts
like the Topkapı manuscript. It is
one of world’s most extensive
palace-museum complexes with
its archive which has more than
300,000 documents.
The palace covers an area of
approximately 700,000 square
meters, a major part of which is
set aside for the Royal Gardens
(Hasbahçe). The court of Topkapı
Palace is divided into two
sections: the Outer Palace (Bîrûn)
and the Inner Palace (Enderûn);
the Harem is a part of the latter.
In 2018, the palace received
2,980,450 visitors from all around
the world and became the most
visited museum of Turkey.



Contrary to common belief,
Topkapı Palace is not the
first palace built during the
Ottoman period. The first
one was the “Old Palace”
(Saray-ı Atik). Unfortunately,
there are no remnants
of the palace.


The One and Only Hagia Sophia

The Hagia Sophia, one of the
historical architectural wonders
of the world, has a very important
place in the art world with its
architecture, grandness, size and
functionality. The Hagia Sophia,
the biggest church constructed by
the East Roman Empire in Istanbul,
has been constructed three times
in the same location. The church
was the place in which rulers
were crowned, and it was also the
biggest operational cathedral in
the city throughout the Byzantine
period.
The first church was constructed
by Emperor Konstantios (337-361)
in 360. No remains have been
recovered from the first church;
however, the bricks found in the
museum storage branded ‘Megale
Ekklesia’ are predicted to belong to
the first construction. The second
church was reconstructed by
Emperor Theodosios II (408-450)
in 415. Some of the remains were
found during excavations and
architectural pieces that belong
to the monumental entrance can
be seen in the west garden. The
current structure was constructed
by Isidoros (Milet) and Anthemios
(Tralles) by Emperor Justinianos’s
(527-565) orders between the
dates 532 and 537. Resources
show that on the opening day
of the Hagia Sophia, Emperor
Justinianos entered the temple
and said, “My Lord, thank you for
giving me chance to create such a
worshipping place,” and followed
with the words “Süleyman, I beat you”
referring to Süleyman’s
temple in Jerusalem. Following
conquer of Istanbul in 1453,
Hagia Sophia was renovated into
a mosque. The structure was
fortified and was well protected
after this period, and remained as
a mosque. Additional supporting
pillars were installed during the
East Roman and Ottoman periods.
The minarets designed and
implemented by Mimar Sinan have
also served to this purpose.
The Hagia Sophia was converted
into a museum by Mustafa Kemal
Atatürk’s orders and has been
functioning as one since 1935. The
museum welcomes visitors from
all around the world and is one
of the most magnificent tourist
attractions of Istanbul. The design
and architecture of the museum is
unbelievably gorgeous.
The Hagia Sophia was
completed in a short period of
five years and remained as the
world’s largest cathedral for
nearly a thousand years.


One of the Oldest Roman Places of Worship:
Little Hagia Sophia

Little Hagia Sophia Mosque,
formerly the Church of the
Saints Sergius and Bacchus,
was converted into a mosque
during the Ottoman Empire.
This Byzantine building was
built in 536 and likely was a
model for Hagia Sophia. It is
one of the most important early
Byzantine buildings in Istanbul.
It was recognized at the time
as an adornment to the entire
city, and a modern historian
of the East Roman Empire has
written that the church, “by the
originality of its architecture
and the sumptuousness of its
carved decoration, ranks in

Constantinople second only to St.
Sophia itself.”
The building stands in Istanbul, in
the district of Fatih, and gave its
name to the neighborhood. Don’t
forget to visit and enjoy the peace
of Istanbul in the garden of this
wonderful mosque…



The Greek Orthodox Patriarchate
Istanbul has been the spiritual center
of the Greek Orthodox world since
around 1600. Officially the seat
of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of
Constantinople, it is known locally
as the Fener Rum Patrikhanesi
(Fener Greek Patriarch), it could be
considered the Vatican of Eastern
Orthodox church.



“The Church of the Holy Savior in Chora”:
Chora Museum


The museum has a Golden
award-winning book called
The Church of Chora book.
It is an interactive museum
guide describing some of the
oldest and finest surviving
Byzantine mosaics and
frescoes in the church.

A simple building from the
outside but a spectacular
church from inside… Welcome
to the Chora Museum which
is located at the Edirnekapı
neighborhood of Istanbul. The
original church was built in the
early 4th century but the majority
of the fabric of the current building
dates from 1077–1081. In the
16th century, during the Ottoman
period, the church was converted
into a mosque and finally it
became a museum in 1948. Even
though it is one of the most
interesting places in Istanbul, this
incomparable building was left out
in the cold for years.
It is the only museum in Istanbul
where you can find the most
beautiful samples of mosaic and
fresco arts. The mosaics of the
former Chora Church tell biblical
stories, which can be followed like
a graphic novel. One of the most
important works of art within the
museum is the Christ Pantocrator
mosaic. It is located in the outer
narthex, above the entrance door
to the inner narthex. No matter
from which direction you look at
this mosaic, you feel like Christ
is watching you. Don’t forget
to check out the frescoes of
Parekklesion and mosaics which
depict the life of Virgin Mary and
the journey of Jesus Christ.



An Enchanting Beauty: Basilica Cistern

The producers of Dan Brown’s
Inferno book’s movie were
looking for a magical and charming
historical venue. The place had to
be one of a kind and marvelous and
they chose Istanbul and Istanbul’s
legendary Basilica Cistern… The
movie did not harm the cistern
at all and made it more famous
globally. The cistern deserves all of
the attention and the compliments
it receive because of its enchanting
beauty.
The Basilica Cistern located in
the southwest of Hagia Sophia.

Constructed for Justinianus I, the
Byzantium Emperor (527-565), this
big underground water reservoir
is called as “Yerebatan Cistern”
among the public because of the
underground marble columns. As
there used to be a basilica in the
place of the cistern, it is also called
Basilica Cistern. The cistern is 140 m
long, and 70 m wide, and covers a
rectangular area as a giant structure.
Accessible with 52-step staircase,
the Cistern shelters 336 columns,
each of which is 9 m high. Two
Medusa heads, which are used as
supports under the two columns at
the northwest edge of the cistern, are
the great work of art from the Roman
period. The enlarged cistern provided
a water filtration system for the Great
Palace of Constantinople and other
buildings, and continued to provide
water to the Topkapı Palace during the
Ottoman era and into modern times.
The Basilica Cistern is currently
operated by Kültür A.Ş. (Culture
Co.), one of the affiliates of Istanbul
Metropolitan Municipality, and
functions as a museum and is a venue
for many national and international
events.



Historical texts claim that
7,000 slaves were involved
in the construction
of the cistern.

Istanbul’s Gorgeous Protector: Rumeli FORTRESS

Young Ottoman Sultan Mehmed the Conqueror
had to come up with the right strategy when
he decided to conquer Istanbul. Anadoluhisarı,
which is on the Asian side of the city, wasn’t able to
control the ships coming from the Black Sea. So,
the construction of Rumelihisarı (Rumeli Fortress)
“Rumelian Castle” began in 1452 right across
Anadoluhisarı and lasted 4 months. According to
the famous architect and art historian Ekrem Hakkı
Ayverdi, almost 300 foremen, 700-800 workers,
200 drivers, boatmen, movers and countless
volunteers worked on it’s construction. The castle
gave its name to the region which is within the
Sarıyer district of Istanbul. It is the cornerstone of
Constantinople becoming Istanbul.
Rumelihisarı got damaged from an earthquake in
1509 and the big fire of 1746, but it is determined
to continue to protect Istanbul. This time, the
castle does the protection with art and music. This
priceless structure is being used as a museum and
an open-air theatre. It hosts many national and
internationa music events in summer. Also, some
of the historical pieces from early centuries like
canonballs are exhibited in the yard of Rumelihisarı.



Rumor has it that Sultan
Mehmed the Conqueror
personally worked
on the construction
of Rumelihisarı and
outlined its plan.



Rose from the Ashes, a One-of-a-Kind Church:
Bulgarian St. Stephen “Iron” Church

Bulgarian St. Stephen Church,
aka Iron Church, is located in
a traditional and historical district
of Istanbul, Balat. The story of
the church is very intriguing
and well-known internationally.
Last year, the church building
opened after a seven-year long
restoration. The church’s original
structure was wooden but it
suffered from a fire and burned
down completely. After that,
the larger current building was
constructed at its place. An iron
frame was preferred to concrete
reinforcement because of the
weak ground conditions and
financial issues of Bulgarians
living in Istanbul. Each and every
single part of the church is made
of cast iron and during the first
week of the grand reopening,
2000 people from all around the
world visited. There are only two
other iron churches in the world
and they keep vanishing day by
day. Today, Istanbul’s Iron Church
is being visited by thousands
of national and international
tourists.



Bulgarian St. Stephen
Church is very important
to Bulgarians culturally
and religiously. Almost
500 tons of iron was used
during the construction of
the Iron Church.

A Healing Church on the Streets of Balat:
Surp Hıresdagabed Armenian Church

Balat is a colorful district of Istanbul
with its narrow and hilly streets,
churches and old traditional houses.
When you walk through the streets
of Balat, you almost feel like you
are in an old Istanbul movie. The
district has hosted many different
civilizations for many years and there
are still many historical structures and
building within the region. One of
these structures is Surp Hıresdagabed
Armenian Church.
After the conquest of Istanbul,
some of the Greek churches were
transformed into mosques and some
are transferred to Armenians. Surp
Hıresdagabed Church was transferred
to Armenians in 1628 and renovated.
The church was renovated once again
in 1835 and has been operating in its
current state since then.



It is rumored that, the
church hosts a special
healing ceremony on
September 12th every year
and many people from all
over the city come over to
heal and find peace.


Gazing on Istanbul from Pierre Loti…

1800s… Famous French writer
Pierre Loti is gazing on
Istanbul’s Golden Horn view
while smoking his hookah. He
thinks of his dearest darling and
words are flowing in his mind. He
has no idea that years later, this
hill will be named after him. He
continues to admire the scenery.
Yes, it is time to talk about one of
Istanbul’s most delightful places,
a legendary and famous beauty,
Pierre Loti hill. The name Pierre
Loti comes from the French
writer Pierre Loti who loved
Istanbul during his time here
(1850-1923). Loti spent a lot of
time on the hill, drinking coffee
and watching the scenery. The
coffeehouse on the hill is so
famous that, when people came
to Istanbul, it is often the first
place they visit. Most of the books
mentioning the hill calls it “the
Lover’s Hill”.
Pierre Loti hill was reorganized
in 1997 with a tourism project of
Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality.

Deserted buildings around
the area got demolished and
wooden mansions matching the
Ottoman – Turkish architecture
were built. In 2010, the
Municipality of Eyup organized
an event for Turkish and French
painters. They gathered on Pierre
Loti hill and painted the view of
the Golden Horn for a week. We
can easily say that Pierre Loti hill
is more than a beautiful touristic
spot for Turkey. It also symbolizes
the friendship between two
countries.


Loti wrote his first novel
for his Turkish lover
Hatice, on Pierre Loti
hill. The heroine of this
sad love story, Hatice,
is buried at Old Topkapı
Cemetery.

Galata Tower is one of
the oldest towers of the
world and it is believed
that, with whomever you
climb up to the tower
first, you will be marrying
that person.


Under the Wings of Galata Tower…

Maiden’s Tower might have
felt a bit lonely in Üsküdar.
We don’t know what the
architects of the era thought
exactly, but they built Galata
Tower right across from it. Some
believe that two towers have
been in love with each other
for centuries but they cannot
get together because of the
intervening Bosphorus. Both
of these towers have countless
legends and stories dedicated to
them. They are the precious and
beloved symbols of Istanbul.
Uniting these two towers
was a mission for Hezârfen
Ahmed Çelebi, a legendary
Ottoman aviator. Allegedly, this
adventurous scientist flew from
the very top of the Galata Tower
and landed in Üsküdar (Asian
Side of the city). Even though
some of leading and respectable
Ottoman historians state that
this story wasn’t verified by any
sources, Istanbul’s residents
prefer to believe this legend. In
fact, the movie “Istanbul Beneath
My Wings” (İstanbul Kanatlarımın
Altında – 1996) which tells the
life story of Hezârfen Ahmed
Çelebi became a cult movie in
Turkey.



Well, what is the mystery of
Galata Tower? In 528, during
the reign of Byzantine Emperor
Anastasius I, the tower was
built as a light house but got
destroyed at the Fourth Crusade.
In 1349, Galata Tower was rebuilt
by Genovese and named it
Christea Turris (Tower “of Christ)
because they believed that Christ
will come there.

The tower was once more
restored during the reign of
Sultan Mahmud II and shaped
into its current appearance.
In 1960s, Galata Tower was
commercialized and opened
to the public. Today, the tower
functions as 360-degree viewing
platform of Istanbul. In time,
Galata Tower became a national
and international touristic place
and now there are many cafes,
restaurants and souvenir shops
around the tower. From the
top of the tower, you can see
Golden Horn and Bosphorus with
a panoramic view. On the top
floor, there is a “Beltur” restaurant
which is owned by Istanbul
Metropolitan Municipality.

In 2013, this rare statue became a
part of UNESCO World Heritage
Center’s Tentative List. The
nine-story tower is 66.90 meters
long and weighs 10,000 tons.
During the Ottoman period,
Galata Tower functioned as
a jail, observatory house, and
a watch tower. There were some
bones and skulls in the canals of
the tower and this arose many
rumors at the time. Most known
rumor was that, there was a cult
living around the tower and they
ripped the hearts of women.


Looking over Istanbul from
Dolmabahçe and Beylerbeyi Palaces…

One of them is located in
one of the most crowded
neighborhoods of Istanbul,
Beşiktaş, and the other watches
over the city from the hills of
Üsküdar. Istanbul has many
magnificent palaces all over the
city, but these two act like the
mind and soul of the city as they
look at each other from two
different sides of Bosphorus.
Dolmabahçe Palace was built
between the years 1843 and
1856 with the order of Sultan
Abdulmecid who was the 31st
Ottoman Sultan. The palace mainly
consists of three parts; Imperial
Mabeyn (State Apartments),
Muayede Hall (Ceremonial Hall)
and the Imperial Harem. Topkapı
was lacking in contemporary style,
luxury, and comfort, as compared
to the palaces of the European
monarchs, so Abdulmecid decided
to build a new modern palace.
The project was designed by
Armenian-Ottoman architects
Garabet Balyan, his son Nigoğayos
Balyan and Evanis Kalfa. He
received some criticism but
silenced everyone by saying:
“Ugliness and wickedness are
banned here, there is only beauty.”
Dolmabahçe Palace witnessed
the last era of Ottoman Empire
and first era of the Republic. Great
Leader Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
used the palace for his studies and
as a Presidential House between
the years 1927 and 1938.
Beylerbeyi Palace was built
between the years 1863 and 1865
with the order of Sultan Abdulaziz.
The palace was constructed to
serve as a summer residence of
Ottoman sultans and a state guest
house to entertain the foreign
heads of state and sovereigns.

The architect of the palace
is Serkiz Bey, who is also a
member of the Balyan family.
The crystal chandeliers of
the palace are mostly French
Baccarat and the carpets are
from Hereke. This delicately
designed palace is also a mustsee tourist attraction.



Mustafa Kemal Atatürk spent the
last days of his life in the palace
as his health deteriorated. He
died at 9:05 A.M. on November
10, 1938. That day, all the clocks
in the palace were stopped and
set to 9:05 after his death. Today,
the clock in the room in which he
died still points to 9:05.

Dolmabahçe Palace



The Mystical Story of Istanbul’s Witness:
Maiden’s Tower

Once upon a time, there
was a very powerful and
magnificent king living in
Istanbul. The king only had
one weakness: his beloved
daughter… One day, he went
to an oracle to learn about his
future and the oracle said: “A
snake will bite your daughter
and she will die.” The king was
ready to lose everything but not
his daughter. He immediately
gave an order to his people and
a construction of a tower on
a small island around Üsküdar
region began. He sent his
daughter to the tower for her to
live there. The tower received
food and beverage from time to
time. One day, a snake sneaks
into a fruit basket and his
sweetheart daughter dies from
its bite. No matter what you do,
you can’t escape fate…
We call it “Maiden’s Tower”. It
is the first scene that comes
to mind when someone says
Istanbul… Once it was very
popular on postcards, now
it is very popular on social
media… Maiden’s Tower is the
apple of Istanbul’s eye with its
architectural structure and many
legends.
This exceptional structure’s
history dates back 2500 years
and it witnessed everything
that the city has encountered
throughout its history. It was
used as a watchtower, defense
tower, lighthouse, quarantine
station and much more. Today, it
only speaks the language of love.
Maiden’s Tower is the symbol
of marriage proposals and
declarations of love. It has a
charming atmosphere with the
magical view of the Bosphorus.
The facility within the tower
serves as a café – restaurant
during the day and becomes a
special restaurant and a unique
venue in the evening. There
are several shuttle boats going
to the tower at certain times
from Kabatas (European Side)
and Üsküdar (Asian Side) all
week. Don’t forget to make
reservations!



Famous poet Bedri Rahmi
Eyüboğlu’s “The Saga of
Istanbul” poem goes like this:
“Say Istanbul and towers come
to mind… If I paint one, the
others are jealous. Maiden’s
Tower ought to know better she should marry Galata Tower
and breed little towerlets.”


TRANSPORTATION



“Istanbul offers 24-hour
services on eight bus
routes and six metro lines
on Fridays, Saturdays
and religious and public
holidays.”

ALL ROADS
LEAD TO
BOSPHORUS

Nostalgic tram of TUnNel-Taksim carries more than 2500 passengers
every day on a line of 1870 meters.



Geographically and historically, Istanbul is a
meeting and a crossing point for all nations.
The city has always been an essential passageway
and a global trade road. At some point in your life,
your path will definitely cross with Istanbul.

Well, the actual phrase is “all roads lead to
Rome” but the “Rome” in the saying is
actually East-Rome. Do you know which city was
the capital of East-Rome? You guessed it right,
Istanbul. Today, the famous Milion monument is still
standing in Istanbul, in the district of Eminönü, at
the northern corner of the square of Hagia Sophia,
and close to the Basilica Cistern. The Milion was
a monument erected in the early 4th century AD
in Constantinople. It was the Byzantine zero-mile
marker, the starting-place for the measurement of
distances for all the roads leading to the cities of
the Byzantine Empire.
Modern-day Istanbul offers a huge network of
public transportation to its citizens that include;
buses and railways such as metro, tram systems
and Marmaray. Travelers can find variety of great
options to get around the city. Traffic is still an
issue, so taxis aren’t always the best solution to get
around. To travel from the European side to the
Asian side, the best and the most gorgeous way
of transportation is the ferries. The whole public
transportation system of the city can easily be
accessed with a single card, which is Istanbulkart.
It is easy to access other cities of the country from
Istanbul. The city has 2 international airports:
Sabiha Gokcen International Airport and the brand
new Istanbul Airport. By using the new Istanbul –
Izmir Highway, the distance between two cities
reduces to 3.5 hours. The High Speed Train service
of Turkey allows the passengers to travel to Ankara,
the capital of the city, in 4 hours.
Remember, no matter which road you chose to use
on your way to Istanbul, that road either belonged
to Alexander the Great, Napoleon or Sultan
Mehmet the Conqueror.





The Apple of Istanbul’s Eye: Bosphorus

The Bosporus is what makes
this city alive. When looked
at geographically, it is a narrow,
natural strait and an internationally
significant waterway and is a
continental boundary between
Europe and Asia. It is also the
world’s narrowest strait used
for international navigation, the

Bosporus connects the Black Sea
with the Sea of Marmara, and, by
extension via the Dardanelles, the
Aegean and Mediterranean seas.
The one-of-a-kind and dazzling
views of Bosphorus cannot be
found anywhere else in the world.
So much so that, countless number
of poets, writers, painters and artists

took inspiration from it and created
a library full of pieces dedicated to
it. Today, there are 3 grand bridges
which connect the continents of
Europe and Asia: 15 July Martyrs
Bridge (The Bosphorus Bridge),
Sultan Mehmed the Conqueror
Bridge (Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge)
and Yavuz Sultan Selim Bridge.


Four Seasons of a Splendid
Experience: Ferries of Istanbul

Ferries of Istanbul (Şehir Hatları
Administration) have a history
of 165 years. The foundations of
the Marmara Sea line were laid
in 1844 and started to operate
ferries between Sirkeci (historical
peninsula district) and the Prince
Islands, and between Sirkeci and
Pendik (Asian side of the city). In
time, ferries became a symbol
of Istanbul and the Bosphorus.
The main network of the ferries
include 6 “Bosphorus” lines to and
from main districts of Istanbul:
Eminönü, Üsküdar, Kadıköy and
Beşiktaş, Karaköy and Kabataş.
Ferries also operate in many
lines (Inner Istanbul Ferry Lines)
between other districts of the city.
There are also the Princes’ Islands
lines and the “famous” Bosphorus
Tours. All-day long Bosphorus
Tours are available for those who
wish to experience the history
and enjoy the amazing views of
Istanbul on board, and non-stop
short Bosphorus Tours are offered
for those with limited time.



World’s Fastest-Growing Metro Line: Metro Istanbul

Metro Istanbul was established
as an affiliate company
by Istanbul Metropolitan
Municipality in 1988 to operate
railway system network in
Istanbul. Metro Istanbul
continues to operate existing
tram, metro, light rail, funicular
and aerial cable car lines as an
affiliate company of Istanbul
Metropolitan Municipality. Metro
Istanbul has a vision of becoming
an exemplary brand in the world.
Winning UITP’s (International
Association of Public Transport)
best practice award in meeting
high passenger demand with T1
Kabataş-Bağcılar Tram Line is a
significant indicator of this vision.
Length of urban rail system
network in Istanbul is 233, 05 km
and Metro Istanbul operates 154,
25 km of this network and Metro
Istanbul renders services to 2

million people every day with its
12 urban rail system lines within
this network. Metro Istanbul
continues to work for its aim of
carrying Istanbul to the future
by rendering fast and effective
transportation services at world
standards, constantly enhancing
its transportation technologies,
constantly investing in Research
& Development and Human
Resources.

Symbol of Public Transportation of Istanbul: Tram

The 19th century’s popular
transportation vehicle tram
was first used in United States in
1852 and Paris in 1855. Istanbul
met with this modern vehicle in
1871. Horse-drawn trams started
working between Azapkapı and
Beşiktaş. After the attention they
received, the system spread
rapidly to the whole city. At the
end of the first year, the tram
system carried four and a half
million passengers in Istanbul with
430 horses. Trams were a very
fashionable way of transportation
in the Ottoman Empire. Other
important cities of the empire
like Thessaloniki, Damascus and
Baghdad caught up immediately.
Unfortunately, after the start of
the Balkan War and World War I,
all of the horses were summoned
into the army and tram services
took a sad break.
In 1914, trams came back to
the lives of Istanbul residents as
electric vehicles. In 1933, Turkey’s
founder Atatürk directly gave an
order to have 320 more trams
within the city. However, around
1960s trams weren’t able to keep
up with the pace and size of the
city and in 1966 trams of the
city worked one last time and
left their place to Trolleybuses.
Though Istanbul residents never
forgot trams… So much so that,
the question of restoring old
wagons at the museum and
electric trams once again coming
into service for nostalgia arose
in 1989. The most suitable place
for this project was Istiklal Street
which was getting ready for
pedestrianization. Thus today’s
nostalgic tram line at Taksim
started operating. The tram was
embraced instantly with its red &
white colors and original structure
and became the symbol of Istiklal
Street, Beyoglu, Istanbul and
Turkey.



A 144 Years Old Metro Line: The Tunnel

Istanbul’s very own Tunnel allows
you to travel from Karaköy to
Galata. It is known as the world’s
second oldest metro line which
has been serving the city for the
last 144 years. A French architect
Eugene-Henri Gavand, visited
Istanbul in 1867 and observed
that a large number of people
walked the steep road between
Galata and Karaköy every day.
In 1871, he decided to design
an underground railway in the
form of a lift between these two
locations so that the people and
goods could be transported. After
the approval of Sultan Abdulaziz,
Gavand completed the Tunnel
in just four years. The line was
renewed in 1968 for electricity
and has been providing non-stop
service since 1971. The 573 meter
long Tunnel has a single-wagon
metro and travels the distance in
90 seconds. Since the alternative
of the Tunnel is the 1000-step
stairway, that 90 seconds means
a lot to Istanbul residents.
Today, the Tunnel is still used
actively by Istanbul residents and
offers a magical and nostalgic
atmosphere to everyone for 90
seconds.

Istanbul’s Wheeled-Metro: Metrobus

Metrobus is one of the
most creative solutions
produced in order to decrease
Istanbul’s traffic density. The
system was put into service in
2007. Metrobus works on the
most important arterial road of
the city and crosses between
continents. The system allows
passengers to transit through
specific roads and saves time by
shortening the distances. There
are now 535 vehicles working
within the system and each
vehicle arrives 30 seconds apart.
Metrobus carries almost one
million passengers daily. Even
though it gets a little crowded
during rush hour, Metrobus
has a very important role within
urban transportation. With its
environmentally-friendly and
comfortable vehicles, Metrobus
is almost like a wheeled-metro.
If you are in a rush in Istanbul,
keep in mind that you can always
choose to travel with Metrobus.



World’s New “Silk Road”: Marmaray

Marmaray is the 76.6 km long commuter rail line
of Istanbul. It comprises a rail tunnel under the
Bosphorus strait, and the modernization of existing
suburban railway lines along the Sea of Marmara
from Halkalı on the European side to Gebze on the
Asian side. The procurement of new rolling stock for
suburban passenger traffic is also a part of the project.
Marmaray is the fourth underground system of the
city. The name “Marmaray” comes from combining the
name of the Sea of Marmara, which lies just south of
the project site, with ray, the Turkish word for rail.

New Cruise Ship Port of Istanbul: Galataport

New cruise ship port of Istanbul, Galataport, which is
being developed in Karaköy district along 1,200 meters
of coastline, will welcome its first cruise ship in April 2020.
A total of $1.7 billion has been already invested in the
project, which is expected to create around 5,000 new jobs.
Galataport is projected to host a total of 64 cruise ships
in 2020. In 2021, 145 cruise ships are expected to dock at
the port. The operators of the port aim to serve up to 500
cruise ships in 2020. The 1.2 kilometers-long coastline had
been closed to the public for over 200 years, Galataport
will be opening it. The venue will have a total of 52,000
square meters of leasable area for shops and restaurants and
another 43,000 square meters for offices. A 177-room hotel
will also be built at the port.

Shortest Road between Two Continents: Eurasia Tunnel

In Istanbul, there are many
different ways to travel from one
continent to the other. The brand
new Eurasia Tunnel is the most
special way to do it because it
is world’s first and only highway
tunnel which connects the Asian
and European continents.
Every single story of Istanbul
has Asian and European bits in
it and it is not possible to isolate
Istanbul from the monumental
stories of these two continents.
For centuries, Istanbul’s story has
been about the power of uniting
these two continents. That’s why,
Eurasia Tunnel is one of a kind and
its place in history very significant.
Eurasia Tunnel is world’s first twindeck highway tunnel crossing
beneath the seafloor. The tunnel
covers a route of 14.6 kilometers.

While the 5.4-kilometer section
of the project consists of a twindeck tunnel under the seafloor
built with special technology
and connection tunnels, a total
of 9.2-kilometer routes on both
the Asian and European sides
includes road expansion and
improvement works. It only takes
15 minutes to cross between
continents. Eurasia Tunnel is an
exemplary, world-class project
with its sensitive approach to the
environment, community and
city. The air quality in the region is
continuously monitored and it is
being ensured that the emission
values meet set standards.



World’s New Air Transport Hub:



Istanbul Airport

Inspired by the ancient history
of the city, Istanbul Airport
is one of the world’s biggest
and most impressive airports
which is built with cutting-edge
technology. As a trade and
culture hub, Istanbul is a center
of attraction with the scope of
opportunities it provides. Located at the intersection of Asia,
Europe and Middle East, Istanbul
Airport is a strategic connection
point for all destinations. Istanbul Airport became operational
on the 95th Anniversary of the
Foundation of Republic, October 29th, 2018. The first phase
of the airport has a passenger
capacity of 90 million. Once
complete, the airport will host
flights to more than 350 destinations with an annual capacity
of 200 million passengers.
It really doesn’t matter where
you come from, Istanbul Airport makes sure that you feel
at home and receive the best
service possible at all times.
As a “masterpiece” which
combines artistic venues with
cutting-edge technology, the
airport’s Air Traffic Control Tower received the 2016 International Architecture Award by the
Chicago Athenaeum: Museum
of Architecture and Design, and
The European Center for Architecture Art Design and Urban
Studies. Design of the tower was
inspired by the unique beauty of
the tulip flower, a key motif in
the Turkish-Islamic culture and
Istanbul’s rich cultural heritage.
The award-winning design was
created by Pininfarina and it reflects the story of Istanbul which
unifies countless cultures. Once
again, the flow of trade, politics
and culture which crosses their
paths in Istanbul is ready to be
transported from Istanbul Airport to the whole wide world.
Let yourself be a part of this
journey!

İstanbul Airport Factsheet:
-75.6 million sqm. total airport area
-6 runways, 3 checkpoints
-326 destinations,
In 3 hours, 133 destinations
-55,000 m2 Duty Free Area
& 31,694 m2 Food & Beverage Area
-Passenger capacity of 90 million yearly




FERRY LINES

Inner Istanbul Ferry Lines

Bosphorus Lines

Princes’ Islands Lines

Bosphorus Tours

➥ KADIKOY - EMINONU

➥ SARIYER - ANADOLU

➥ KABATAS - EMINONU -

➥ FULL BOSPHORUS
CRUISE

➥ KARAKOY - KADIKOY
➥ USKUDAR - EMINONU
➥ KADIKOY - BESIKTAS

KAVAGI - RUMELI KAVAGI
➥ KUCUKSU - BESIKTAS KABATAS

➥ HALIC HATTI

➥ CENGELKOY - ISTINYE

➥ BOSTANCI - KARAKOY KABATAS

➥ KADIKÖY - SARIYER
➥ ANADOLU KAVAĞI ÜSKÜDAR
➥ ÜSKÜDAR - ORTAKÖY
➥ RUMELİ KAVAĞI EMİNÖNÜ
➥ İSTİNYE - ÇUBUKLU
➥ KÜÇÜKSU - İSTİNYE

KADIKOY - ADALAR
➥ BOSTANCI - ADALAR
➥ BEŞİKTAŞ - KINALIADA BURGAZADA
➥ BEŞİKTAŞ - HEYBELİADA BÜYÜKADA
➥BOSTANCI - ADALAR
➥ EMİNÖNÜ - KADIKÖY ADALAR

➥ SHORT BOSPHORUS
TOUR



ACCOMMODATION

THE
“WORLDFAMOUS”
TURKISH
HOSPITALITY

Istanbul has 117.199 bed capacity and over 232 five-star and four-star hotels in the
city which include both international and Turkish-based hotel chains.



Our ancestors built inns, caravanserais and hostels on the road of
travelers in order to carefully host them because they valued guests
more than anything. Today, the business and luxury hotels located all
across Istanbul and inner-city boutique hotels are the best examples of
the world-famous Turkish hospitality.



According to the Mastercard’s
Global Destination Cities
Index, Istanbul is the 8th most
popular city in the world. 8%
growth is expected from the
city in 2019.

Istanbul has been the home of countless civilizations for thousands of years. The city itself is a historical
and cultural heritage and it has one of the most exquisite cuisines of the world. Istanbul can be described
as the capital of many things, but one of the most famous and globally well-known quality of Istanbul and
Turkey is our hospitality. That’s why, accommodation is one of the best and top-notch parts of Istanbul.
Istanbul received 13.4 million visitors in 2018 and became the most visited city of Turkey. Istanbul is one
of the most intriguing destinations of the world and the role of Turkish hospitality is enormous in this. It
doesn’t matter if you’re staying at the most luxurious or historical hotel of the city or even in a boutique
hotel, you can find the “well-known” high-quality and credible service in any hotel of Istanbul. Well, this
city never disappoints.



ACCOMMODATION

Historical Hotels of Istanbul
Grand Hotel de
Londres

When “Orient Express”
reached Istanbul five years
after its operation in 1883, the
first hotels of Istanbul had already
begun to appear, in the very
cosmopolit westernized section
of the city called “Pera”. One of
those hotels was “Hotel Buyuk
Londra” or “Grand Hotel De
Londres”, which soon after its
opening took its place among
the best hotels of Istanbul. It
was built in 1892 as a house,
but soon after that the structure
was transformed into a hotel.
Hotel Buyuk Londra is one
of the few establishments
managing to survive from that
era to our time. Passing through
many renovations, the hotel
nevertheless still graciously
reflects the atmosphere of the
1900’s.

Pera Palace Hotel

The Pera Palace Hotel is a historic special
category hotel and museum hotel located in
Beyoğlu. It was built in 1892 for the purpose of
hosting the passengers of the Orient Express and
was named after the place where it is located.
It holds the title of “the oldest European hotel
of Turkey”. Famous writer Agatha Christie’s
1934 novel Murder on the Orient Express was
allegedly written in the Pera Palace. The hotel
maintains Christie’s room as a memorial to the
author. In addition, Room 101, the heart of Pera
Palace Hotel, was organized as a museum room
on the 100th anniversary of the birth of Mustafa
Kemal Atatürk and is open to visitors.

ACCOMMODATION

Only Ottoman Imperial Palace and Hotel on the
Bosphorus: Çırağan Palace Kempinski

Çırağan Palace, a former Ottoman palace, is now a five-star hotel in the Kempinski Hotels chain. It is
located on the European shore of the Bosporus, between Beşiktaş and Ortaköy. The palace, built
by Sultan Abdülâziz, was constructed between the years 1863 and 1867. It is the only Ottoman Imperial
Palace and Hotel on the Bosphorus. Çırağan Palace Kempinski offers a resort ambience in the city and
reflects the ultimate luxury of a genuine Ottoman Palace.





ICVB MEMBERS – HOTELS
Avantgarde Collection Levent

Conrad Istanbul

Büyükdere Caddesi No: 161
Zincirlikuyu/Levent 34394 İSTANBUL
T: +90 212 337 0 444
W: www.avantgardecollection.com

Barbaros Blvd 34353 Beşiktaş
T: +90 212 310 25 25
W: www.conradistanbul.com.tr

Grand Hyatt Istanbul

Hilton Istanbul Bosphorus

Harbiye Mah. Taskisla Caddesi No:1
34367, Şişli, Istanbul
T: +90 212 368 12 34
W: istanbul.grand.hyatt.com

Cumhuriyet Cad. No.50 34367 Harbiye-İstanbul
T: +90 212 315 60 00
W: www.istanbul.hilton.com

Konak Hotel Istanbul

Mercure Istanbul Taksim Hotel

Cumhuriyet Cad. No: 75
Elmadağ, Taksim
T: +90 212 225 82 50
W: www.hotelkonak.com

Ömer Avni Mahallesi İnönü Caddesi No:42
Taksim, İstanbul
T: +90 212 924 27 27
W: www.mercureistanbultaksim.com

Sheraton Istanbul Ataköy Hotel

Sürmeli Istanbul Hotel

Sahilyolu 34158 Ataköy
T: +90 212 413 06 00
W: www.sheratonistanbulatakoy.com.tr

Prof. Dr. Bülent Tarcan Sk. No: 3
34349 Gayrettepe / İstanbul - Turkey
T: +90-212 272- 1160
W: www.surmelihotels.com



Crowne Plaza Istanbul-Asia

CVK Park Bosphorus

Yenişehir Mahallesi Dedepaşa Cad. No: 15
Viaport Kurtköy - Pendik
T: + 90 216 585 60 60
Web: www.cpistanbulasia.com

Address: Gümüssuyu Mah. Inönü Cad. No:8,
34437 İstanbul/Turkey
T: +90 212 377 88 88
W: www.cvkhotelsandresorts.com

Hyatt Regency Istanbul Ataköy

Istanbul Marriott Hotel Şişli

Ataköy 2-5-6. Kısım, Rauf Orbay Caddesi
Sahil Yolu No:2/1,
Bakırköy, Istanbul, Turkey, 34158
T: +90 212 463 12 34
W: istanbulatakoy.regency.hyatt.com

Abide-i Hurriyet Caddesi. No.142,Sisli - İstanbul
T: +90 212 375 0100
W: www.marriottistanbulsisli.com

Radisson Blu Hotel, Istanbul Sisli

Shangri-la Bosphorus Istanbul

19 Mayıs Caddesi No:2 Şişli/Istanbul
T: +90 212 375 0000
W: www.radissonblu.com

Sinanpasa Mah, Hayrettin Iskelesi Sok, No.1,
Besiktas, Istanbul, 34353, Turkey
T: +90 212 275 8888
W: www.shangri-la.com/istanbul/shangrila/

Swissotel the Bosphorus Istanbul

Titanic Downtown Beyoglu

Visnezade Mah. Acisu Sok. NO. 19
Macka Besiktas Istanbul
T: +90 212 326 11 00
W: www.swissotel.com/istanbul

Hacıahmet Mahallesi, Beyoğlu, İstanbul
T: +90 212 313 32 32
W: http://www.titanic.com.tr/titanicdowntownbeyoglu

In the heart of the business world, located in Istanbul city center
and has the difference in the sector with the first Grand Cevahir
Hotel and Convention Center welcome.

Grand Cevahir Hotel has since
its opening in 2002 brought a
breath of fresh air and a different
understanding of the hospitality
sector to Şişli. With a total of 323
rooms including the suites and 22
separate meeting halls, the hotel offers to its guests more than
what is expected from a hotel.
The hotel has 22 fully equipped
meeting rooms and 8.5 metres
ceiling height a 2.500 sq. m. Ballroom and the Auditorium Hall
with 1013 fixed seats for congresses, conferences, symposiums, general assemblies, gala
dinner, weddings and corporate
organizations. As Grand Cevahir
Hotel and Convention Center, we
took our place among the Green
Star Certified Hotels by Ministry of
culture and Tourism in order to
provide better quality service to
our valued guests and as for our
responsibility towards nature.
Hotel is located: 5 km to Levent
and Maslak, 3 km to Taksim and
Nişantaşı.
9 km away from the historical
peninsula where The Grand Bazaar, Hagia Sophia Museum, Topkapı Palace and Egyptian Bazaar
are located. İstanbul Grand Airport is 35 km, Sabiha Gokcen International Airport is 40 km away.

T U R K E Y ’ S F I R S T 5 - S TA R C O N V E N T I O N H OT E L
GRAND CEVAHIR HOTEL & CONVENTION CENTER
Grand Cevahir Hotel & Convention Center is the first 5-star convention hotel of Turkey and has created a major difference
within the industry. Grand Cevahir Hotel & Convention Center has one of the biggest convention halls of Europe. With its
2500 m2 area, it also has one of Europe’s biggest ballrooms. The complex has 323 rooms in total including the suites and 22
seperate meeting rooms. Grand Cevahir Hotel & Convention Center provides its guests more than they expect.

ROOMS & SUITS

RESTAURANTS & CAFES

MEETINGS & EVENTS

GRAND CEVAHIR HOTEL & CONVENTION CENTER
Halide Edip Adıvar Mahallesi Darülaceze Caddesi No: 5 Şişli - Istanbul / Turkey

w w w . g c h . c o m . t r

HEALTH CLUB






Turkish Coffee is a part of UNESCO’S Representative List of the Intangible Cultural
Heritage of Humanity.


The city offers all kinds
of Turkish food and as a
global city, it has a lot of
restaurants which focus on
international cuisines.

World-famous chefs, gourmets and anyone who visited
Turkey at least once, know that Turkish cuisine is very
rich in its nature. We listed street food of Istanbul, some
of the best restaurants in the city and one-of-a-kind
delights of Turkey for you.

Although meat-based foods such as kebabs are the mainstay in Turkish cuisine as
presented in foreign countries, native Turkish meals largely center around rice,
vegetables, and bread.

Turkish cuisine is largely the heritage of
Ottoman cuisine and influenced those and
other neighboring cuisines, including those of
Southeast Europe (Balkans), Central Europe, and
Western Europe. Turkish cuisine varies across
the country. The cooking of Istanbul, Bursa,
Izmir, and rest of the Asia region inherits many
elements of Ottoman court cuisine, with a lighter
use of spices, a preference for rice over bulgur,
koftes and a wider availability of vegetable stews
and fish. The cuisine of the Black Sea Region
uses fish extensively while the cuisine of the
southeast) is famous for its variety of kebabs,
mezes and dough-based desserts such as
baklava and künefe. The cuisines of the Aegean,
Marmara and Mediterranean regions are rich in
vegetables, herbs, and fish. Central Anatolia has
many famous specialties mostly based on dough
such as mantı and gözleme. As the center of the
country, Istanbul brings all of these delicious and
wonderful dishes together. Istanbul has different
kinds of street food, and even its own districts
have their “famous” dishes. We underlined Turkish
cuisine’s “best of the best” for you. Don’t leave
Istanbul without tasting at least 5 of these favorite
foods!



CUISINE & RESTAURANTS

Street Food Of Istanbul
Simit

Simit is a ring-shaped bagel-like bread covered with
sesame seed. It is by far the most
common and popular street
food of Istanbul. People here
mostly consume with cheese
and a cup of Turkish tea. The
yummy trio of simit, cheese and
tea kind of tastes better if you are
on a ferry ride on Bosphorus.

Kokoreç

Kokoreç is made with either
lamb or goat intestines that
are wrapped around seasoned
offal. It is either served as a
sandwich or on a plate with
garnishes. It is a bit adventurous and experimental for many
people, but after you taste it,
you won’t regret you tried it.

Fish & Bread

The fish & bread street dish
is mostly found in Eminönü
district. It is a freshly grilled
fish fillet packed in half a loaf
of white bread with plenty of
onions, tomatoes, salad, and
herbs.



Meatballs in Bread

It is one of the most popular and beloved street foods
of Istanbul and Turkey. Along
with mixed seasoning, sliced
tomatoes, green peppers and
onions, this meatball sandwich
will blow your mind.

Stuffed Mussels

Mussels filled with herbed
rice, currants, and pine
nuts are another popular street
food, and the vendor will continue handing you a new one
with a spritz of lemon until you
say stop.

Chicken & Rice

Chicken & Rice duo is sold
anywhere and everywhere
on the streets of Istanbul. It is
simply butter rice with chickpeas topped with chicken
breast. A lot of people also like
to add ketchup & hot peppers
to the dynamic duo.




Lokma

This is a popular street food
existing since the Ottoman
era. Lokma, hoop desserts,
are pastries made of leavened
and deep fried dough, soaked
in syrup or honey, sometimes
coated with cinnamon or other
ingredients.

Pickle Juice

A glass of pickle juice, either
spicy or not, is famed as a
quick, tasty and natural cure for
even the fiercest of headaches.
It is yummy and full of minerals.

Roasted Chestnuts

In the winter, roasted chestnuts are one of the most popular street foods and quite the
delicious snack.


Kumpir

Baked potatoes filled with every single garnish imaginable
is a great street food. Usually,
people put black-green olives,
mushrooms, sausages, pickles,
corn, ketchup and some butter within. The most famous
Kumpir places are located at
Ortaköy neighborhood.

Çiğ Köfte

Çiğ Köfte is a raw meatball
dish in Turkish cuisine. It
is traditionally made with either beef or lamb, but in Turkish restaurants and on streets
only the vegetarian variety
made with extra fine bulgur are
served. It is sold in a lettuce leaf
and it has to be spicy!

Asİtane Restaurant

Since 1991 Asitane Restaurant
has been bringing the
forgotten tastes to the present
with its summer and winter
menus offered by adding more
than 200 historical receipts to
its archive and using numerous
original sources such as dinner
and dessert expenditure records
of Topkapı, Dolmabahçe and
Edirne Palace; record books
of important feasts; books
written by foreign government
officers and people from
various occupational groups;
documents from Libraries of
Beyazıt and Millet in Istanbul; a
work dated November, 1539 and
named “A Feast Book” belonging to
the circumcision feast of Suleiman
the Magnificent’s sons Beyazıd and
Cihangir in Palace of Edirne; literary
texts of festivals; and old Ottoman
dictionaries. In order to keep the
forgotten tastes of Ottomans
alive, Asitane organizes special
periodical dinner weeks such as
“Meals from Period of Mehmet the
Conqueror”, “Aphrodisiac Meals of
Ottoman Palaces”, “Fish and See
Food in Ottoman Palaces”. Asitane
Restaurant located on the garden
floor of a renovated Ottoman
Mansion just next to Kariye
Museum in Edirnekapı.



One-Of-A-Kind And
Must- Taste Foods
Of The City
Turkish Coffee

The well-known taste of
Turkey, Turkish coffee, is the
favorite drink of Turkish people.
Especially in the morning and
afternoon, well, any time of the
day actually. The best side dish
of Turkish coffee is a fine chat
with a friend. Turkish coffee first
appeared in the Ottoman Empire,
after a while the strong coffee
was considered a drug and its
consumption was forbidden. Due
to the immense popularity of the
beverage, the sultan eventually
lifted this prohibition. Turkish
coffee culture had reached
Britain and France by the late
17th century. The first coffee
house in Britain was opened by
a Turkish Jew in the mid-17th
century. The coffee is prepared
using very finely ground coffee
beans, unfiltered. Turkish coffee
refers to a method of brewing
very finely ground coffee. Any
coffee bean may be used; arabica
varieties are considered best, but
robusta or a blend is also used.
The beans must be ground to a
very fine powder, which is left in
the coffee when served. Turkish
coffee is made by bringing the
powdered coffee with water
and usually sugar to the boil in a
special pot called cezve in Turkey.
As soon as the mixture begins to
froth, and before it boils over, it
is taken off the heat; it may be
briefly reheated twice more to
increase the desired froth. The
best way to do it is distributing
about one-third of the coffee to
individual cups; the remaining
amount is returned to the fire and
distributed to the cups as soon as
it comes to the boil. The coffee
is traditionally served in a special
type of small porcelain cups.
Sugar is added to Turkish coffee
while brewing, so the amount of
sugar must be specified when
preparing the coffee. It may be
served unsweetened (sade), with
little or moderate sugar (orta), or
sweet (şekerli). Turkish coffee is
more than just a type of coffee
for us, it is kind of a lifestyle.



Turkish Delight - Lokum

Turkish delight or lokum is one
of the most famous and wellknown food of Turkey. It tastes like
a piece of heaven and is incredibly
popular. Turkish delight is a family of
confections based on a gel of starch
and sugar. Different kinds of the
delight consist largely of chopped
dates, pistachios, and hazelnuts or
walnuts bound by the gel; traditional varieties are often flavored
with rosewater, mastic, Bergamot
orange, or lemon. The confection is
often packaged and eaten in small
cubes dusted with icing sugar, copra, or powdered cream of tartar,
to prevent clinging. Other common
flavors include cinnamon and mint.
The origin of the confection is not
well established, but it is known to
have been produced in Turkey as
early as the late 1700s. Don’t forget
to pick up a box of Turkish delight
on your way back home!
nuts are spread in between the
phyllo (yufka) layers, dressed with
butter, baked and sweetened with
syrup or honey. The best baklava 
depends on the quality of the
flour, the thinness of the dough
(phyllo) and the proportion of
the syrup. Although the history of
baklava is not well documented,
its current form was probably developed in the imperial kitchens
of the Topkapı Palace in Istanbul.
The Sultan presented trays of
baklava to the Janissaries every
15th of the month of Ramadan.
Don’t die before eating this wonderfully tasty dessert!

Baklava

Baklava is one of the well-known
desserts of Turkey. It is not actually based on Istanbul, but it is very
famous within the city. Chopped

Turkish Pizza “Lahmacun”

Often referred to by tourists as “Turkish pizza”,
lahmacun is a very uncomplicated meal of thin
dough topped with a minced meat-onion-red pepper
mixture, slid in the oven for a few minutes and served
piping hot. It’s customary to top it with a handful of
parsley and a squirt of lemon juice, then roll it into a
wrap and enjoy with a glass of cold ayran (a mixture of
yogurt and water).

Kuru Fasulye (White beans)

Kuru fasulye and pilav (rice) is
a common dish cooked and
loved all around Turkey but cheap
and nutritious. The dish comes
with a cayenne in the middle and
accompanies by rice, salad and
pickles. It is meat free so can also be
tried by vegetarians. The best kuru
fasulye in Istanbul is at Suleymaniye,
a small and old neighborhood of
Old City.



NO MATTER
WHAT YOU
NEED,
YOU WILL
FIND IT HERE

With around 120 malls around the city, Istanbul has more shopping malls
than many European countries does in total.



Byzantine Greek historian Procopius
stated that two Nestorian Christian
monks eventually uncovered the
way silk was made. From this
revelation, monks were sent by the
Byzantine Emperor Justinian (ruled
527–565) as spies on the Silk Road
from Constantinople to China and
back to steal the silkworm eggs,
resulting in silk production in the
Mediterranean.

The city of two continents, Istanbul, is one of the beloved
shopping and fashion destinations of the world.

Istanbul has always been a global hub of trade and
an important stop for international merchants.
The story of Istanbul’s trade history dates back to
thousands of years and to the world-famous Silk
Road and Spice Road. Spice Road refers to the trade
between historical civilizations in Asia, Northeast
Africa and Europe. The Silk Road was a network of
trade routes which connected the East and West, and
was central to the economic, cultural, political, and
religious interactions between these regions from
the 2nd century BCE to the 18th century. Istanbul
was one of the economically and geographically
important stops for both roads. Today, the city still
continues to be one of the most important trade
and business hubs of the world. It provides a lot of
options for shopping & fashion and easily combines
“old and new” while blending traditional and modern
concepts.



Shopping Malls Of The City

Akasya

Akasya is located in Acıbadem
at the Üsküdar district on the
Asian side of the city. Akasya offers
visitors a unique architectural
design with 30 m high freeform
skylights to provide maximum
daylight with a ground floor
height of 8 m for shop displays
to experience street shopping
offering visitors close to 257 stores.

Istanbul Cevahİr

As tone of the largest
shopping malls in the city
center, İstanbul Cevahir offers its
visitors world class shopping 365
days of the year. Considered one
of İstanbul’s symbolic venues,
Cevahir is a shopping and leisure
destination for tourists as well as
locals. İstanbul Cevahir houses
over 200 stores spreading across
6 floors, consisting of a diverse
range of shopping categories
and a full range of brands.

Emaar Square Mall

Emaar Square Mall has been
designed as a destination
for shopping, entertainment
and gastronomy, and offers an
extraordinary experience to
its visitors from Turkey and all
around the world. Emaar Square
Mall hosts luxury brands and
stores which are available for
the first time in our country,
while presenting an approach
that responds to each and every
need of the modern urban life;
from eating and drinking to
entertainment.



Forum Istanbul

S

ituated on a total of 495.000
square meters area in
Bayrampaşa district, Forum
Istanbul is not only the largest
shopping center in Turkey but
also in Europe, offering a rentable
space of 176.245 square meters,
and 286 domestic & international
brands. Paving the way for a new
life in Istanbul with its blend of
stores, events, architectural style
and works of art, Forum Istanbul
Shopping and Residential Center
provides easy access to shopping.

İstİnye Park

İstinye Park is a shopping mall
with 291 stores located at
the İstinye district. The center
features both enclosed and
open-air sections. The open-air
section has a green central park
and offers street-side shopping.
The center includes an authentic
Turkish food bazaar- a traditional
market place, inspired by Turkish
architecture and history.

Zorlu center

Creating an unequalled
living space at the heart of
Istanbul, Zorlu Center is now the
“meeting venue in the city”. Zorlu
Shopping Mall is built on a land
of totally 105.000 m² comprising
a main court of 10.000 m² and
a second court of 12.000 m²
in addition to a leasable area
of 73.000 m² which is home to
approximately 205 stores.



Old & New Shopping Streets Of The City
The Iconic Hub of Fashion: Nİşantaşı

Nişantaşı is a residential and
shopping neighborhood
located at the Şişli district. When an
Istanbulite thinks of Nişantaşı, the first
thing that comes to mind is fashion
and designer boutiques. It is one
of the most unique neighborhoods
of Istanbul because it is the only
place you can find exquisite pieces
of clothing. The area includes
fashion shops, department stores,
cafés, pubs, restaurants and night
clubs. Abdi İpekçi Street, Turkey’s
most expensive shopping street in
terms of lease prices, stretches from
the neighborhoods of Maçka and
Teşvikiye to the center of Nişantaşı.

Bağdat AVENUE

Bağdat Avenue is a notable high
street located on the Anatolian
side of Istanbul. The street runs
approximately 14 km (8.7 miles)
from east to west in the Maltepe
and Kadıköy districts, almost
parallel to the coastline of the Sea
of Marmara. It is a main street in an
upper-scale residential area. The
one-way avenue with old plane
trees is flanked with shopping
malls, department stores, fashion
garment stores, elegant shops
offering world famous brands,
restaurants of international and
local cuisine, pubs and cafes,
luxury car dealers and bank
agencies. Bağdat Avenue can also
be considered as a large open-air
shopping mall. Most of the retail
stores are open on all days of the
week, including Sunday afternoon.

Mahmutpaşa

Mahmutpasha Bazaar is a
shopping street in Istanbul.
It is located in the area between
Grand Bazaar and Eminönü in the
Mahmutpaşa neighbourhood of
Fatih district. This market area,
with copious small shops on
both sides of the main street, is
a symbol of cheap shopping in
Istanbul. The bazaar hosts 256
shops. This is the place where you
can find anything and everything.


TAKE A MYSTICAL TRIP
TO SPICE BAZAAR

The Spice Bazaar is one of the
largest bazaars in the city.
Located in the Eminönü quarter
of the Fatih district, it is the most
famous covered shopping complex
after the Grand Bazaar. Its name is
“Egyptian Bazaar” because it was built
with the revenues from the Ottoman
eyalet of Egypt in 1660. The bazaar is
(and still is) the center for spice trade
in Istanbul. Spice Bazaar has a total
of 85 shops selling spices, Turkish
delight and other sweets, jewellery,
souvenirs, and dried fruits and nuts.



Fashion And More

Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Istanbul

Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week
Istanbul is held two times a
year to explore the Spring/Summer
and Fall/Winter collections. The
platform highlights Turkey’s and
Istanbul’s rich fashion heritage
with fresh interpretations of classic
designs. Throughout the week, the
designers presented collections
celebrating self-expression and
individuality. With over 30 shows
presented at the modernist Zorlu
Performance Art Centre MercedesBenz Fashion Week Istanbul
continued the Mercedes-Benz
commitment to championing
emerging designers. This year,
MBFWI completed its 13th season
in Istanbul. During the week, the
event gets visited by hundreds of
international purchase managers
from 23 different countries.

Istanbul Moda Academy (IMA)

IMA is one of the world-wide
acclaimed, most proficient fashion
schools in Turkey, offering an
innovative and modern education
in the field of fashion and all
relevant branches. Founded in
2007 with the cooperation of the
European Union, the Ministry of
Economy and Istanbul Textile and
Apparel Exporters’ Associations
(İTKİB) General Secretariat, İMA
pursues the goal of training
fashion professionals of the future,
possessing an in-depth insight in
fashion, design and arts as well
as an awareness of the global
markets. The Academy thus aims
to introduce a creative, innovative
and future-steering workforce in
the fields of textiles and apparel,
two pivotal industries in Turkey. IMA
adopting the systems and structures
of internationally proven success
is a member of the International
Foundation of Fashion Technology
Institutes (IFFTI). Besides the
University of Arts London/ London
College of Fashion, its strategic
partner in academics, IMA
collaborates with the world-famous
fashion schools such as Polimoda,
Institut Français de la Mod and
Nottingham Trent University.



Turkish Textile Industry’s Dynamic Trio

Turkey also remains among one of the
world’s most important textile and apparel
manufacturing countries and 6th largest
supplier in the world and the 3rd largest
supplier to the EU. The hearts and minds of
Turkish textile industry, Laleli, Osmanbey and
Merter districts of Istanbul are well-known for
more than 30 years for their international and
local wholesale and ready-to-wear clothing
stores. There are more than 10,000 stores
which are trading with more than 215 countries
at the districts. Today, Turkish textiles and
clothing industry is the most outward-oriented
industry that can compete with any other
countries in the international markets in terms
of high quality and a wide range of products.

Global Turkish Brands

There are a lot of globally
well-known Turkish fashion
brands such as Mavi Jeans,
Penti, Koton, Avva, Roman,
Damat Tween, Kiğılı and Gizia.
Incorporated in Istanbul in
1991, today Mavi is recognized
as a highly successful, global
lifestyle brand. The company
sold 10M denim items globally in
2018 via its 5,500 POS and 427
mono-brand stores. Another
example, Penti, has 106 stores
in 29 different countries and
have exports to 43 countries.
The number of stores is
continuously growing and being
complemented by sales offices
located in the United Kingdom,
Romania, Ukraine and Spain.
Turkish brands are growing
bigger in the global industry
every day. Keep them in mind on
your visit to Istanbul!



Turkish Designers
New Generation Turkish Designers

Turkish designers and their work is appreciated all around the world. Some of the very successful designers of
Turkey are Hakan Akkaya, Hüseyin Çağlayan, Dilara Fındıkoğlu Raşit Bağzıbağlı and Gülşah Saraçoğlu. Raşit
Bağzıbağlı received an award of “best young designer of the year” in Turkey and in the same year he received
an award for “best upcoming designer” at the Face of Fashion competition in New York. Dilara Fındıkoğlu is a
London based designer of Turkish origin and she is the designer many world-stars like Rihanna, Madonna and
Lady Gaga. Hüseyin Çağlayan, known as “Hussein Chalayan”, is the designer of Lady Gaga and Björk.


TIPS

MUST-BUY SOUVENIRS FROM ISTANBUL
Have you ever wondered what to take home as an
Istanbul souvenir? Here’s a list of souvenirs from
Istanbul to bring back home and make everyone jealous of how great your trip was.
When you get to know Istanbul a little bit, the city definitely feels like a city of wonder. Every single corner of the
city is filled with numerous stories and that’s why, there are a lot of characteristic souvenirs of Istanbul.
We listed some of the must-buy souvenirs from Istanbul for you. Let’s begin!

Handicraft of Anatolia: Turkish Carpets
Your first choice can be a historical Turkish carpet which is
filled with traditional Turkish ornaments. Anatolian women
knit these carpets very carefully and carry this tradition on to
the new generations. You can find the best carpets of Istanbul
at the Grand Bazaar which has customers from all around the
world. You can have your name written on miniature carpets
and take a unique piece home.

Nazar
A nazar, word deriving from Arabic and meaning sight,
surveillance, attention, is an eye-shaped amulet believed to
protect against the evil eye. In Turkey, it is known by the name
nazar boncuğu (nazar bead) and almost every single house in
Turkey has one. Nazar is often hung in homes, offices, cars,
children’s clothing, or incorporated in jewelry and ornaments.
They are a popular choice of souvenir with tourists.

A Classic: Magnets
Magnets are a very classic souvenir to get from any kind
of destination. Istanbul’s magnets have a lot of scenery
options like the Bosphorus, Golden Horn, the Blue
Mosque, Galata Tower and more.

Turkish Coffee
Turkish coffee refers to a method of brewing very finely ground
coffee. Turkish coffee is made by bringing the powdered coffee
with water and usually sugar to the boil in a special pot called
cezve in Turkey. The coffee is traditionally served in a special
type of small porcelain cups. You can find Turkish coffee and its
cups in almost any neighborhood of Istanbul.



Porcelain Caftan
A kaftan or caftan is a variant of the robe or tunic, and has
been worn in a number of cultures around the world for
thousands of years. Kaftans were worn by the sultans of
the Ottoman Empire. Interestingly cute small porcelain
caftans are sold in gift shops as souvenirs in Istanbul.

Lace
Lace is a delicate fabric made of yarn or thread in an open
weblike pattern made by hand in Turkish culture. There are
various different kinds of original lace designs in traditional
shops of Istanbul.

Wooden & Silver Clogs
Clogs are a type of footwear made in part or completely
from wood. There are still traditional clog masters in
Turkey, making the footwear by hand. In Turkish culture,
it is believed that clogs are healthier for your feet.

Beads
Beads are mostly used as religious objects or as common
accessories of men in Turkey. Beads are made of different kind
of stones here but the most popular bead type is the ones
which are made with jets. Jet is a type of lignite, a precursor to
coal, and is a gemstone. It is mostly found in Erzurum where
they produce the beads.



ISTANBULITES
AT HEART



We spoke with Istanbulites who weren’t born and raised
in Istanbul, but have been living here for many years
and developed a loving relationship with the city.

Istanbul is one of the most culturally rich and vibrant cities of
the world. Many national and global companies’ headquarters
are located within the city and there are a lot of foreigners
living in the city for various purposes. Some moved here for a
short-term stay, but some fell in love with the city, decided to
stay and became real Istanbulites.



Anastasia Gorlova
UCOM Global GmbH Editorial Manager

“The straight between Europe
and Asia is one of the most
mesmerizing places in the world”

What brought you here?
As many Russians I first visited
Turkey on a holiday, and later
got married in Istanbul.
What makes Istanbul
so special?
Bosphorus and the people.
The straight between Europe
and Asia is one of the most
mesmerizing places in the
world, day and night, any season
its shores are breathtakingly
beautiful. And the people here
are extremely open-hearted
which is rare for a big city.
Favorite spots in the city…
Kadıköy - this is where I lived
for many years. Moda with
its beautiful shore and Carsi
(Beşiktaş) with its lovely market
and cozy restaurants are among
my favorites.

As a global city…
Istanbul is a cultural and
business hub where East
and West, different ways and
practices merge and melt into
each other resulting in a unique
working atmosphere. Since
I’ve worked in multinational
companies and corporations
in Istanbul, I have always felt
connected to the world. All
the high-level meetings and
international events are held
in Istanbul as this is where
everyone can reach easily.
After work and on the
weekends…
I attend a painting course in
Kadıköy, go out with friends for
traditional “Raki-balik” in Moda
or Bostancı, and in summer I
always try to visit the Princes’
Islands as often as I can.

The challenges…
Its size! When you have a job
that requires quite a lot of
moving around, doing interviews
and organizing events, Istanbul
can be a bit of a challenge.
Luckily the underground system
in the city is excellent, although
it does need to cover a larger
area.
Family & Friends
They love visiting Istanbul for
a holiday or just stay here for a
couple of days, as Istanbul has
so much to offer, and never
stops to surprise you.


Johan Larrson
Oriflame Cosmetics Vice President & Head of Turkey

“People here are extremely
helpful, generous and warm.”

What brought you here?
I work for Oriflame Turkey and
this is actually my 2nd time
living and working here. I used
to work and live here also in
2008-2010 and I had a fantastic
time here during those years
with many great memories.
Hence, when Oriflame asked
me if I wanted to move back
and take over Turkey again in
Nov 2015, it was an easy choice
for me to say yes!
What makes Istanbul
so special?
For me there are so many
reasons why I love Turkey and
Istanbul, but the main reason
is the people. People here are
extremely helpful, generous
and warm. If you get lost,
people will more than happily
take the time to help you, if
you look lonely, people will
happily invite you to join them
etc. The Turkish hospitality
and friendliness is surely one
of the major reasons why I
love to work and live in Turkey
and Istanbul. On top of this, I
also love the mix of new and
old and the fact that the city
is carrying a great history with
many cultural and religious
buildings and at the same time
being one of the most modern
and trendy cities. This mix truly
makes Istanbul a unique and
special city!
Favorite spots in the city…
Wow, very difficult question
since there are so many nice
places in Istanbul. However,
I love to hang out with my
friends in different restaurants
next to the Bosporus in areas
such as Bebek, Arnavutköy and
Yeniköy but also in more local
places in areas such as Şişhane
and Beyoğlu. For me, nothing
beats sitting with your friends
on a summer evening, at some
of the great restaurants next
to the Bosphorus, overlooking
the water and the beautiful city.
At those moments, there is no
other city in the world I would
rather live in than Istanbul.
As a global city…
People are, in general, very
positive and full of energy
and passion, which I truly
like and appreciate. It is also
easy to find smart and highly
educated people here. Given
the geographical position, the
high population and the high
number of international people
in the city, I definitely feel that
I am internationally connected
to the rest of the world living
and working here. Istanbul is a
very well-known city for people
all around the world and while
traveling to other countries,
people are always curious when
I mention that I live in Istanbul
and Turkey.
After work and on the
weekends…
I like to spend my time being
active with fitness or exploring
new areas and places together
with my fiancée Izabela. On top
of that, I also love to spending
time with our friends at some of
our favorite restaurants.


Samantha Johnson
TRT World - Sports Anchor and
Journalist

“Istanbul has a beautiful soul.
The Bosphorus is so
therapeutic and so iconic.”

What brought you here?
Quite simply, the opportunity to
work here. The funny thing is,
I had never been to Istanbul or
Turkey in my life. The only thing
I knew about Istanbul was that
Liverpool won the Champions
League at the Ataturk Stadium.
But I did more research
about the city, and there was
something about Istanbul I
couldn’t put my finger on, but I
knew this was the right thing to
do. I needed a new challenge in
my life, and my instinct was to
just go for it. And it’s been the
best decision of my life.
What makes Istanbul
so special?
Istanbul has a beautiful soul. It’s
so rich in history. I am extremely
lucky that I’ve been introduced
to a life that’s normally not
exposed to foreigners and
expats, and in some way it’s
made me feel more at home
in the city. The more Turkish
people I meet, the more I
understand the different and
intricate facets of Turkish society.

Favorite spots in the city…
Anywhere along the Bosphorus,
and the further up I go towards
the Black Sea, the calmer it
gets. I have quite an intense
schedule, so I find that I can
switch off when I’m drinking or
dining by the Bosphorus. It’s so
therapeutic and so iconic. If I ever
leave the city, that’s probably the
thing I’d miss the most. Another
favourite spot - has to be any of
the football stadiums in the city.
Again, I’ve been very privileged to
be introduced to Turkish football
from all levels of the game and I’d
say hands down, I’ve had some of
the best nights watching football
whether it’s been at Besiktas,
Fenerbahce or Galatasaray.
The atmosphere is second to
none, and the chants are almost
quite poetic. It’s the fans and
the atmosphere that makes the
Turkish Super Lig famous.
As a global city…
It provides a beautiful balance
between business and pleasure.
The working, ambitious side, and
then you have the “pleasure”,
where you can enjoy the history
and the social life the city has to
offer. And what’s even better, is
that I can go anywhere in Turkey
in about an hour and enjoy
what the country has to offer.
I didn’t realize how much of a
hub Istanbul was until I moved
here. The fact that it takes you
only a few hours to fly to another
country is an attractive feature.
Everyone passes through the city,
wherever they have to go in the
world. The amount of people I’ve
been connected to - especially in
football - has been immense.
After work and on the
weekends…
After four years living in Istanbul
I’ve become quite comfortable
and developed a healthy routine
into my life. So I spend most
of my time at the gym, chilling
at coffee shops, or simply
socializing. I also like to hit the
coast from time to time. Bodrum,
Kaş and Göcek are my favorite
places to go too.



Nicolas Kipper
The Ritz-Carlton General Manager

“Unlike a typical European city,
Istanbul is alive and energetic
24/7 so there’s always something
to do and explore.”

What brought you here?
My first time in Turkey was
actually 20 years ago when
I started working for Hyatt
Hotels here in Istanbul. The city
captivated me in so many ways
and has been my favorite since
then. So I came back here again
in 2017, and started working here
at the Ritz-Carlton, Istanbul. I’m
extremely happy to be back in
this magical and historical city.
What makes Istanbul
so special?
There are indeed many
reasons why Istanbul is one of
Europe’s most influential and
dynamic cities. The history and
architecture reflecting Turkey’s
Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman
pasts in combination with its
thriving culinary, art, music and
nightlife scenes are leading the
city’s new-found reputation
as the capital of cool and are
placing it firmly on the map as a
travel go-to destination. Istanbul
is the only city in the world
existing on two continents, it’s
a fascinating melting pot where
eastern and western influences
come together. There is also so
much to do and explore – the
city’s newfound bohemia and
undiscovered creativity alongside
some of the most significant
archaeological sites from the
oldest of civilizations.
Favorite spots in the city…
I love discovering new
restaurants, cafes, hidden
spots in the neighborhood, or
any secluded areas in the city
that I can get away to on the
weekends. It’s impossible to pick
a specific one since I’m always on
the lookout for underrated spots
to get more of a local vibe. Unlike
a typical European city, Istanbul
is alive and energetic 24/7 so
there’s always something to do
and explore.
As a global city…
In Istanbul, you don’t have much
of a diverse workplace where
people have to respect and adapt
to each other’s cultures and
backgrounds. In that way, I think
we’re more on the comfortable
side when we do business, which
impacts the overall mood in
the company. Especially in the
hospitality industry, we are all
internationally connected to the
rest of the world. We also see the
great increase in travelers with
leisure, culture or health purposes
as well as families. Ever since
the tourism industry reached its
peak this year, Istanbul is back to
its deserved status among other
European cities.
After work and on the
weekends…
I spend a lot of time traveling so
whenever I’m in the city, I love to
stroll around in my motorcycle
and find relaxing activities to do,
or explore new places. Turkish
cuisine is my number one favorite
cuisine in the world, so I tend to
be on the lookout for new local
restaurant openings.


Reto K. Klauser
Shangri-La Bosphorus General Manager

“There is a vibrancy in the day
to day life of Istanbul that is
energizing without the stress.”

What brought you here?
I was with Shangri-La in
Singapore for four years when
the opportunity in move to
Istanbul came up. It was not
a difficult decision to make
and has proven to be an ideal
progression for us.
What makes Istanbul
so special?
Istanbul is indeed very special.
More than just being a place
to tick off on a bucket list,
our guests are drawn into the
spirit of the city... It isn’t just a
destination with attractions and
interesting places to visit. There
is a vibrancy in the day to day
life that is energizing without
the stress.
Favorite spots in the city…
Easily, being with friends on a
nice boat with friends on the
Bosphorus is on top of the list.

The second would be having
a Turkish breakfast along the
Bosphorus.
As a global city…
My wife and I feel very much part
of the world here in Istanbul.
We settled in much easier here
than in other places where we
previously lived. People have
been amazingly helpful and
welcoming. Being comfortable
and integrated into Istanbul life
does not separate us from the
international community or the
rest of the world. Rather, it has
expanded our world to include
the rich culture and experiences
we have in this city
After work and on the
weekends…
When I can, I enjoy going
out for dinner and trying new
restaurants. My wife and I like
driving out to Kemer Country
for a game of golf with friends
a couple of times a month.
But spending an afternoon
or evening cruising on the
Bosphorus or just having tea by
the Bosphorus is magical and
rejuvenating.
The challenges…
Heavy traffic can be an issue as it
is the enemy of tight schedules.
Also, the fact that my Turkish is
not good enough creates some
challenges.
Family & Friends
My family, who lives in
Switzerland are all very happy
that we are here in Istanbul and
so are we. It’s close enough to
home. Our guests are looking
forward to seeing us, of course,
but I suspect they are equally if
not more excited to experience
this great city.



Antony Doucet
Kerten Hospitality Brand & Marketing Director

“Take Cairo and New York, put them
together and you will be able to paint the
picture of Istanbul. It’s a great combination
of the Orient and the Occident.”

What brought you here?
In my previous role with Park
Hyatt Paris Vendome, as VIPs
& Celebrities Guest Relations
Manager, I was given the
opportunity to be part of the
opening of Park Hyatt Istanbul in
2008. My role then was to stay for
a period of 2 years before returning
to Paris in 2010. My affair with
Istanbul was more of a love of first
sight. I was not ready to leave after
commuting to work on a boat,
walking the streets in the Old City
or sipping tea by the Bosphorus.
So after 2 years I wanted to explore
more and more. This is when
Kerten Hospitality opened its first
hotel and I was hired as the Hotel
Manager. Today I am the Brand &
Marketing Director for all entities of
Kerten Hospitality.
What makes Istanbul so special?
Istanbul has so multiple layers,
colors, flavors and sights. This
city has gone through 3 different
empires and you can feel the rich
history in everyday life. I like the
diversity of the city. I like its energy.
When people ask me to describe
Istanbul in a couple of words I
always say: “take Cairo and New
York, put them together and you
will be able to paint the picture of
Istanbul. It’s a great combination
of the Orient and the Occident. I
also like Istanbul for its “mahalle”
(neighborhood) aspect – a city
feature which is obsolete nowadays
in megapolis and modern capitals.
There is no more “mahalle” feeling.

As a global city…
With Turkish Airlines flying to 240
destinations in the world and with
the new airport we are definitely
connected to the world. The
evolution has turned Istanbul into
the center of the world. It’s not a
cliché to say that Istanbul is at the
crossroads of the East & the West.
It’s a fact.

Favorite spots in the city…
I love Karaköy area, Bebek,
Kadıköy, Moda.
Favourite “old school” restaurants:
Asmalı Cavit, Zubeyir
Favourite modern meyhane: Karakoy
Lokantasi, Duble Meze
Favourite modern Turkish cuisine:
Yeni Lokanta and Neolokal
Favourite rooftop: Kasa Lokanta& Bar

After work and on the
weekends…
I live in Tophane and have the most
amazing view. So, being at home
on my balcony overlooking the
old city, the Marmara Sea and the
Bosphorus is already a treat. On
Saturday morning, l like to go to
Ferikoy Pazari to buy all my fruits
and vegetables for the whole week.
My afternoon is spent cooking and
hosting friends for dinner. On a
Sunday I usually have early breakfast
(before all places get too crowded)
and if I’m in the mood, my Sunday
evening is with Rakı Balik at Asmalı
Cavit. In the summer time I love
renting a boat with friends and we
go swimming in Beykoz or around
Buyukada Island.

Favourite breakfast place:
Kuravasan Nisantasi & Assk Khave
Kurucesme
Favourite bar: Soho House
Favourite hamam: Kilic Ali Pasa
Hamam
Favourite shopping brands: Beymen
Club, Bey Karakoy
Favourite market: Bomonti organic
market



Patrick Henry Hays
City of North Little Rock Arkansas
Former Mayor

“The city that is always ‘alive
and awake’ looking for the next
opportunity to add to it’s illustrious,
exciting, and never ending history…”

My first trip to Istanbul during
the Spring of 2004 found me
at 1:30 in the morning on the
balcony of my room with a final
glass of raki; after having spent
an evening with friends planning
how our group would convince
the Turkish Government to
give my City, North Little
Rock, Arkansas, a World War II
submarine that had served in
the United States Navy from
1943 to 1970, and the Turkish
Navy from 1970 until it being
decommissioned in 2002.
While sipping my raki and
watching the heavy traffic at
that late hour traveling over one
of the two bridges that cross
the Bosporus; it began to sink
in that I was seeing the place
that for centuries had been
where West met East. Where a
city of over 15 million people
in a nation of 83 million lived,
worked, played, learned and
created stories that needed to
be told and shared with our
world, and that I would now
be a part of that history with
my own story that would only
grow with the many times that
I would return to Istanbul and
Turkey in the days and years that
would follow that first night.
Having just read a biography
on Ataturk shortly before
leaving the US for Turkey, my
mind drifted to that night on
May 16, 1919 when Mustafa
Kemal, boarded the small
cargo freighter “Bandirma”, and
departed Istanbul on his way
to Samsun to begin on May
19, 1919, the Turkish War of
Independence.
New York is known as the “City
that Never Sleeps”, but pales a
bit in comparison with Istanbul;

which could certainly claim
title as the “City that Is Always
Alive and Awake” looking for the
next opportunity to add to it’s
illustrious, exciting, and never
ending history.
Ankara, Izmir, Bodrum, Trabzon,
Mardin, Midyat, Tuzla, Golcuk,
and now North Little Rock’s
“Sister City”, Samsun, join
Istanbul as having given me
special memories of my time
in Turkey. Oh, the Turkish
Government did give me the
submarine, which now occupies
a special place on the banks of
the Arkansas River over which
the flags of Turkey and the
United States now proudly fly--Side by Side.


Introducing the fully enclosed First Class Suite

Experience true luxury with your own private hotel room in the sky. Game changing
technology includes temperature controls and mood lighting, an industry first with
virtual windows, and so leather seating reminiscent of a Mercedes-Benz S-Class.

CULTURE & ARTS

T H E ARTISTIC &

ARTFUL CIT Y

Istanbul boasts a total of 91 museums, including 35 private museums,
19 museums operating under the Culture and Tourism Ministry and
3 belonging to the Turkish military.



Turkish film director,
photographer, screenwriter
and actor Nuri Bilge Ceylan
won the Palme d’Or, the
highest prize at the Cannes
Film Festival, for his movie
Winter Sleep in 2014.

A city this historic and old has no other chance
than being a city of arts also. Istanbul has its own
culture but the city is filled with different kinds
of art forms and events. Get ready to be lost in
Istanbul’s art world’s charm.

Culture and arts are the foundations of a modern
city. Istanbul has a thousand yearlong history,
and the city is filled with traditional art pieces.
However, Istanbul is also the center of modern
arts. Like many cities of the world, Istanbul also
transformed into becoming an artsy city in the 90s.

The city has different kinds of art-focused events
all year long. There is always another exhibition at
another cultural center in Istanbul. The city aims
to become a global culture and art destination.
We listed the museums, galleries and the best art
events of the city for you. Voilà!



CULTURE & ARTS

Events Of The City
The Istanbul Biennial

The Istanbul Foundation for
Culture and Arts (İKSV) has
been organizing the Istanbul
Biennial since 1987. The biennial
aims to create a meeting point
in Istanbul, in the field of visual
arts between artists from diverse
cultures and the audience.
The fifteen biennials İKSV has
organized up to now have
enabled the formation of an
international cultural network
between local and international
art circles, artists, curators and
art critics by bringing together
new trends in contemporary
art every two years. Considered
as one of the most prestigious
biennials alongside Venice,
São Paolo and Sydney, the
Istanbul Biennial prefers an
exhibition model which enables
a dialogue between artists
and the audience through
the work of the artists instead
of a national representation
model. The curator, appointed
by an international advisory
board, develops a conceptual
framework according to which a
variety of artists and projects are
invited to the exhibition.

Contemporary Istanbul
to develop contemporary art
and culture and to increase
awareness in the field and to
promote them both inside and
outside Turkey as well as to
strengthen relations in the region
by organizing international events
and programs.

Contemporary Istanbul is the
leading annual art fair in
Turkey, situated at the meeting
point of Europe and Asia in one
of the great cities of the world.
Contemporary Istanbul takes
place each September and offers
a platform for the city’s thriving
art scene, growing art market
and collector base, as well as
an access point to the best
contemporary art from the wider
region. CI is also conducting
activities throughout the year


The Istanbul Film Festival

The Istanbul Film Festival was
first presented as a film week
in the summer of 1982, within the
framework of the International
Istanbul Festival. The grand
prize of the festival, the first ever
Golden Tulip, was given this
year to Michael Radford for his
film 1984. Accredited by FIAPF
(International Federation of Film
Producers Associations) in 1989 as
a “specialized competitive festival”,
the “film week” thus was renamed
the Istanbul Film Festival. The
festival awards the Golden Tulip to a
film that reflects “new perspectives
in cinema.” The Festival features
an international competition,
provides a broad showcase for
recent Turkish film productions,
and thus represents a rewarding
medium where Turkish and foreign
filmmakers get together. The
Festival draws a special interest
to world classics, presenting
retrospectives, and curated sections
included in its program which
comprises close to 200 titles,
making it the most comprehensive
film festival in Turkey. With an
admission number of 110,000 in
2019, it is also considered the
biggest film festival.

The Istanbul Music Festival
The Istanbul Music Festival
is considered as the most
prestigious and established classical
music event in Turkey. Throughout
its history of more than 40 years, it
has played a major role in building
up an appreciation for classical
music in Istanbul and Turkey. In
its 43 years the Istanbul Music
Festival hosted the most prestigious
orchestras and ensembles such
as Symphonieorchester des
Bayerischen Rundfunks, New York 
Philharmonic, Berlin Philharmonic, Vienna
Philharmonic, Royal Concertgebouw
Orchestra, Simon Bolivar Symphony
Orchestra, Orchestre de Paris and more.
A distinguished line-up of international
soloists such as Elizabeth Scwarzkopf,
Kiri Te Kanawa, Kathleen Battle, Cecilia
Bartoli, Montserrat Caballé, Renée
Fleming, Itzhak Perlman and Anne Sophie
Mutter. Being the oldest of the Istanbul
Festivals, which became landmarks of
cultural life in Turkey, the Istanbul Music
Festival has also earned a reputation for
its major role in encouraging research
in musicology and in launching special
projects on shared cultural values
through its productions.



Istanbul Jazz Festival

Istanbul Jazz Festival is organised every year in July since 1994 by the
Istanbul Foundation for Culture and Arts (İKSV). İKSV chose to build this
festival around jazz music because it believes jazz is one of the most
innovative musical genres – open to new ideas, inclusive and accessible.
Accordingly, İKSV organizes a broad-spectrum event that not only brings
together music lovers and musicians, but also supports the work of jazz
musicians in Turkey and encourages new productions. Istanbul Jazz
Festival features classical and modern jazz, Latin and Nordic jazz, works
combining electronic music and jazz, and other music categories, such
as rock, pop, reggae, funk and world music. Each year, the festival attracts
thousands of people to more than 30 concerts held at various historical
venues of Istanbul, such as Hagia Eirene Museum, Istanbul Archaeological
Museums, Esma Sultan Mansion, as well as extra-ordinary outdoor venues
and courtyards of landmark buildings around the city.

The Istanbul Theatre Festival

An international event
bringing together theatre
companies and dance groups
from Turkey and abroad with
the audience, The Istanbul
Theatre Festival was first held in
1989. Organised biennially since
2002, Istanbul Theatre Festival
returned to an annual cycle in
2017 after 15 years. Once every
year, the festival hosts carefully
selected companies and artists
that open up new horizons for
both the audience and the art
world by bringing national and
international, classical and
contemporary renditions to the
stage through its unique lens.
The Istanbul Theatre Festival,
together with the Avignon
Festival, the Athens & Epidaurus
Festival, the Grec Festival, has
formed the European Network
of Mediterranean Festivals
entitled Kadmos.

Istanbul Foundation for Culture and Arts (IKSV)

Istanbul Foundation for
Culture and Arts (İKSV) is a
non-profit cultural institution.
Since 1973, the Foundation
continues its efforts to enrich
Istanbul’s cultural and artistic
life. İKSV regularly organizes the
Istanbul Festivals of Music, Film,
Theatre and Jazz, the Istanbul
Biennial, the Istanbul Design
Biennial, Leyla Gencer Voice
Competition, autumn film week
Filmekimi and realizes one-off
events throughout the year.
The Foundation hosts cultural
and artistic events from various
disciplines at its performance
venue Salon İKSV, located at the
Nejat Eczacıbaşı Building, and
offers creative events program
for children and youngsters
at İKSV Alt Kat. İKSV organizes
the Pavilion of Turkey at the
International Art and Architecture
Exhibitions of la Biennale di
Venezia, conducts studies and
drafts reports with the aim of
contributing to cultural policy
development, and supports
artistic and cultural production
through presenting awards at
its festivals, commissioning
works, taking part in international
and local co-productions
and coordinating an artist
residency program at Cité
Internationale des Arts in France,
as well as the annual Aydın
Gün Encouragement, Talât Sait
Halman Translation, and Gülriz
Sururi-Engin Cezzar Theatre
Encouragement Awards. İKSV
is a member of the General
Assembly of the Turkish National
Commission for UNESCO, since
2018.


Istanbul Archaeology Museums

The Istanbul Archaeology Museums are a group of three archaeological museums located in the Eminönü
district. The Istanbul Archaeology Museums consists of three museums: Archaeological Museum (in the
main building), Museum of the Ancient Orient and Museum of Islamic Art (in the Tiled Kiosk). It houses over one
million objects that represent almost all of the eras and civilizations in world.
Cankurtaran, 34122 Fatih/İstanbul
www.istanbularkeoloji.gov.tr

Rahmi M. Koç Museum

The Rahmi M. Koç Müzesi, part of the Rahmi M. Koç Museology and Culture Foundation, is a private nonprofit institution dedicated to the collecting, housing, researching, preserving and exhibiting of industrial and
engineering objects and their documentation from all countries and periods up to the present day. The Museum uses
its collections and resources to inform, inspire and delight the general public, to attract more visitors to museums as
well as cultural activities in Turkey, and to support research into industrial history.
Piri Paşa, Hasköy Cd. No:5 D:No:5, 34445 Beyoğlu/İstanbul
www.rmk-museum.org.tr

Sakıp Sabancı Museum

Sabancı University’s Sakıp Sabancı Museum is located in Emirgan. In 1925, Prince Mehmed Ali Hasan of the
Hidiv family of Egypt commissioned the Italian architect Edoardo De Nari to build the villa, now the museum’s
main building, and it was used as a summer house for many years by various members of the Hidiv family.
Sakıp Sabancı Museum presents a versatile museological environment with its rich permanent collection, the
comprehensive temporary exhibitions that it hosts, its conservation units, model educational programs and the
various concerts, conferences and seminars held there.
Emirgan, Sakıp Sabancı Cd. No:42, 34467 Sarıyer/İstanbul
sakipsabancimuzesi.org/tr

Istanbul Modern

Istanbul Modern was founded in 2004 as Turkey’s first museum of modern and contemporary art. Committed to
sharing Turkey’s artistic creativity and cultural identity with the local and international art worlds, the museum
hosts a broad array of interdisciplinary activities. Istanbul Modern embraces a global vision to collect, preserve,
document and exhibit works of modern and contemporary art and make them accessible to the public at large.
The museum offers a variety of cultural activities in its permanent and temporary exhibition halls, photography
gallery, spaces for educational and social programs, library, cinema, café, and store.
Asmalı Mescit, Meşrutiyet Cd. No:99, 34430 Beyoğlu/İstanbul
www.istanbulmodern.org

Naval Museum

In 1897, Naval Museum was established under the name of “The Museum and Library Administration Office” in
a small building in the Imperial Dockyard. The museum consists the annex exhibition building, the gallery of
historical caiques, the cultural center and the open exhibition area.
Sinanpaşa, Beşiktaş Cd. 6/1, 34353 Beşiktaş/İstanbul
www.denizmuzesi.dzkk.tsk.tr



Art Galleries
Pilevneli Gallery

Pilevneli’s recent renovation, now purposed entirely to show contemporary art. The gallery admits everyone
freely, at no cost to the public, so that all might join in fishing out the obscurities of the collective imagination
from every nook and cranny of the post-modern building. What was once a Factory, has turned into a kind of
tool shed of visual ideas capable of revising human purpose.

Yenişehir Mah. Irmak Cad. No:25 Dolapdere, Beyoğlu / İstanbul
Mecidiyeköy: Fulya Mah. Büyükdere Cad. No:76 Şişli / İstanbul
www.pilevneli.com

Galeri Nev

Established in 1987, Gallery Nev İstanbul is one of the longest-running galleries in Turkey. Throughout the 90s
the Gallery was known for representing significant 20th century modernist artists and hence recognized as a
leading institution at the forefront of shaping the country’s contemporary art history. While Gallery Nev Istanbul is
now focused on contemporary artistic practices, the gallery has also staged historically significant retrospective
exhibitions at landmark locations around Istanbul.

İstiklal Cad. Mısır Apt. No:163/23 Beyoğlu / İstanbul
www.galerinevistanbul.com

X-ist

X-ist is one of Turkey’s leading art galleries, founded 14 years ago with the aim of supporting young
contemporary artists who produce with universal ideas and mentoring them throughout their careers.

Kemankeş Karamustafa Paşa Mah. Mumhane Cad. No:50 Karaköy, Beyoğlu / İstanbul
www.artxist.com

Pilot Galeri

Located on Sıraselviler Street, PİLOT aims at being an inter-disciplinary space that supports creative projects and
aspires to introduce historic works that marked the history of contemporary art as well as the ones beyond
their time.
Sıraselviler Cad. No:83/2 Beyoğlu / İstanbul
www.pilotgaleri.com

The Poet of Istanbul: Orhan Veli

Orhan Veli (1914 –1950) was a famous and innovative Turkish poet.
He is one of the founders of the Garip Movement in Turkish poetry
together with Oktay Rıfat and Melih Cevdet. Aiming to fundamentally
transform traditional form in Turkish poetry, he introduced colloquialisms
into the poetic language. His first poems were published in journals
when he was a high school student. In 1941, he published a poem book
entitled Garip/The Stranger with his high school friends, the poets Oktay
Rifat and Melih Cevdet Anday. Besides his poetry Orhan Veli crammed
an impressive volume of works including essays, articles and translations
into 36 short years. He wrote one of the best Istanbul poems of all time
which is called “I am listening to Istanbul”.

ANLATAMIYORUM
(I CAN’T EXPLAIN)
(Moro Romantico)
If I cried, could you hear
My voice in my poems,
Could you touch my tears
With your hands?
Before I fell prey to this grief,
I never knew songs were so enchanting
And words so mild.
I know there’s a place
Where you can talk about everything;
I feel I’m close to that place,
Yet I can’t explain
*Translated by Talat Sait Halman

Street Musicians Of Istanbul
Istanbul’s streets, subways, ferries and most crowded avenues are always filled with
vibrant and talented musicians. The most popular spot of street musicians is Taksim’s
Istiklal Street and the second best spot is Kadıköy. The musicians play all kinds music
from traditional to classic. They are free souls and they are a part of this city’s culture. It
would be impossible to imagine Istanbul without its street musicians.

Feel free to dance with them, tip them or just relax and
get lost in the music with them!




First colored photo of Istanbul
was taken in 1895. The photo
was found from the archive
of an US-based postcard
company.

Istanbul’s event schedule and event venues are always alive and
kicking. The city hosts countless number of concerts, festivals,
panels, seminars, summits, art exhibitions, conferences,
workshops, shows, receptions and more all year-long…
Most of the event and concert venues of Istanbul are located on the European
side of the city, especially around Şİşlİ district.

Istanbul is a lot of things, but more than anything,
this city is an event destination. Cultural and social
setting of the city is remarkable. Immeasurable
number of diverse events are being organized
within the city 24/7 and it is definitely not easy to
keep up with them. Turkish event industry provides
world-class event services and continues to grow
bigger each and every year. When it comes to event
venues of the city, the gorgeous views of Istanbul,
particularly the Bosphorus, steps in and dazzles
everyone. The city is also filed with historic and
socially-adored event venues. Here, we listed on
some of the most outstanding venues of Istanbul.
Enjoy!


EVENT VENUES

Concert Venues
Cemİl Topuzlu Open-Air Theatre

The Cemil Topuzlu Open-Air Theatre is a contemporary amphitheater
located at Harbiye neighborhood of Şişli district. It is by far the first
venue which comes to mind when the city has a concert. As the city’s
most popular summertime outdoor venue, the theatre primarily hosts
music concerts in various genres of local and international performers.
It also hosts cultural activities for several festivals held in Istanbul in the
summer. The theatre’s seating capacity is 3,972 and the stage is large
enough to enable 200-300 background actors to freely move.

Küçükçİftlİk Park

Küçükçiftlik Park served as an amusement park for many years. In 2009, the venue
was restructured and has been hosting corporate events, launches, exhibitions,
receptions, weddings, concerts and exhibitions ever since. Almost all of the megahit
concerts were at Küçükçiftlik Park. The venue has a capacity of 17,000 and open all year.


Cemal Reşİt Rey Concert Hall

The Cemal Reşit Rey Concert
Hall is a concert hall located in
the Harbiye neighborhood of Şişli
district. It is one of the country’s
major concert halls, being the first
one designed for classical music.
Named after the Turkish composer
Cemal Reşit Rey, the hall is owned
by the Metropolitan Municipality
of Istanbul and operated by its
subsidiary, the Kültür company.

Cultural Centers

Akbank Sanat

Akbank Sanat is located on
Istiklal Street, Beyoglu and the
center celebrated its 26th year in
2019. The Center is supporting the
development of contemporary
arts in Turkey and hosting many
international projects in different
artistic fields, giving special attention
to empowering young artists by
creating opportunities for their
artistic development. Akbank Sanat
is organizing more than 700 events
throughout the year and hosts a wide
range of events such as exhibitions,
modern dance performances,
classical music recitals, jazz concerts,
panel discussions, children’s
workshops, film screenings and
theatrical performances.




Caddebostan Cultural Center – CKM

Caddebostan Cultural Center
(CKM) is one of the most
important cultural venues of the
Asian Side of Istanbul. The center was built by Municipality of
Kadıköy in 2003 and opened its
doors with a Fazıl Say concert on
2005. Throughout the year, CKM
hosts plays, jazz and classical music concerts, movie screenings, art
exhibitions and panels of national
and international artists and more.
The cultural center has 8 movie
halls, a book house, a restaurant,
a gym, a boutique art library, an
art gallery, 2 foyer exhibition areas
and 2 multipurpose halls.

Movie Theaters
Atlas Movie Theater

Atlas Movie Theater is the last
“old movie theater” of Istanbul. It is located within the Atlas
Passage on İstiklal Street, Beyoğlu
and has been providing its services
to movie-lovers since 1946. The
screen of the movie theater is giant and it is one of the most unique
places in the city.

Emek Movie Theater

Emek Movie Theater was a
historical movie hall located
on Istiklal Street, Beyoğlu. The
movie theater began construction
in 1884 under the name of “Club
des Chasseurs de Constantinople”
(Hunters Club of Constantinople),
and first opened its doors in 1924
under the name of Melek Sineması
(Angel Cinema) because of the Art
Nouveau style angel figures
on the screen. In 2016, after
the reconstruction of Cercle
d’Orient building, the movie
theater was moved within the
Grand Pera complex.


Theater Stages

Harbİye Muhsİn Ertuğrul Stage

Harbiye Muhsin Ertuğrul Stage
has been the most valuable
theater stages of Istanbul since
1964. It is owned by Istanbul
Metropolitan Municipality and
operated by its City Theatres
(Şehir Tiyatroları) division. The
theatre is named in honor of
the Turkish actor, producer and
director Muhsin Ertuğrul.

Haldun Taner Stage

Haldun Taner Stage is a theatre
venue located in Kadıköy
district (Asian Side) and the
building was transformed into
a theatre venue in 1989. It is
owned by Istanbul Metropolitan
Municipality and operated by its
City Theatres (Şehir Tiyatroları)
division. The theatre is named in
honor of the Turkish playwright
Haldun Taner.

Event Venues

Bomontİada

Bomontiada is located at
Bomonti, Şişli district of
Istanbul. The venue hosts a
colorful program of cultural
activities, co-generating
screenings, concerts, visual
art performances, food
festivals, creative business
conventions and more.
Bomontiada is a complex
which has an open space
and it aims to structure an
understanding of culture
provided by the pluralities
of the urban environment.
bomontiada commission
and host workshops, live
performances, screenings and
markets, cultivating the open
spaces of bomontiada with
free programs for the public.


Cemİle Sultan
Korusu

Cemile Sultan Korusu is a historical
(Ottoman era) plantation and
an event venue/restaurant located
in Kandilli district of Asian Side of
Istanbul. The venue has a shockingly
beautiful view of the Bosphorus and
was restored by Istanbul Chamber
of Commerce Education and Social
Services Foundation. Cemile Sultan
Korusu hosts weddings, corporate
meetings and graduations that can
be held in lush gardens and in open
spaces as well as open and closed
restaurants serving Turkish and
international cuisines. The venue also
has social facilities where you can
play various sports like swimming,
basketball, volleyball and tennis.
PORTAXE

PORTAXE

Managed by LS Banquet, PORTAXE was founded in 2006 and
embraced the Shine hall in a move
of expansion in 2007, which made
the place an ideal venue for all types
of organizations with its closed and
open areas. Offering its services for
all types of special invitations such
as wedding ceremonies, corporate
gatherings, launches, graduation
balls, cocktails, parties, henna night
organizations, trainings, and bachelor party all throughout the year;
PORTAXE gives its guests memorable moments of joy thanks to a
unique and mesmerizing view of
the Bosphorus. PORTAXE can host
diverse organizations at it waterfront terrace during the summer
months and its closed hall during
the winter months, both with a
splendid view of the Bosporus.
Since all types of vehicles can
be taken inside the closed hall of
PORTAXE, the place provides a
wide range of inspiring ideas for
memorable launching events.
PORTAXE can host 2500 people
in open-air cocktail organizations
and 1100 people in seated organizations.



Cemile Sultan Korusu

Salon IKSV

Located at the entrance and first
floors of Istanbul Foundation for
Culture and Arts – IKSV building,
Salon has become a new stop
of the city’s hub of culture and
arts. Salon hosts classical, jazz,
rock, alternative and world music
Salon IKSV concerts, theatre and dance
performances along with panels
and conferences. Presenting a
large variety of events, Salon is
open from debut October to the
end of May; hosting about 20
different events each month.

Cemile Sultan Korusu

SantralIstanbul

The SantralIstanbul was opened in
2007 and is an arts and cultural
complex located at the upper end
of Golden Horn in the Eyüp district.
The center, consisting of an energy
museum, an amphitheater, concert
halls and a public library, is situated
within the Silahtarağa campus of
Istanbul Bilgi University that was
formerly the first power station of the
Ottoman Empire.


TRAVEL AGENCIES

For your Istanbul trip & events


DEKON GROUP

Küçükbakkalköy Mh.
Albay Sok
No:24 34750
Ataşehir/İstanbul
+90 216 573 18 36

Bâb-ı Âli Cad. No: 3
Kat:4 Cağaloğlu Fatih
Nişantaşı/İstanbul
+90 212 219 19 37

Sultan Selim Mah. Eski
Büyükdere Cad. Hümeyra
Sok. No.12 34415
Şirintepe/Kağıthane
İstanbul
+90 212 347 63 00

www.dorakmice.com

www.devent.com.tr

www.dekongroup.com

etstur

fıgur

Merdivenköy Mh.
Nur Sk. 1I/11 C Blok
Kadıköy/İstanbul
0850 202 62 62

19 Mayıs Cad. No.4
Nova Baran Plaza
Kat.6 34360
Şişli/İstanbul
+90 212 381 46 00

www.etsmice.com.tr

www.figur.net

k2 conference
and event
management
Koşuyolu Mah.
Ali Nazime Sok. No.45
34718 Koşuyolu
Kadıköy/İstanbul
+90 216 428 95 51
www.k2-events.com

TIPS

karavan turkey

mcı turkey

scala mıce

Halaskargazi Cad.
No.112/7 34371 Şişli
İstanbul/Turkey
+90 212 247 50 44

Ebulula Mardin Cad. Ülgen Sok.
4.Gazeteciler Sitesi A2 Villa No:12
1.Levent Beşiktaş/Istanbul
+90 212 270 06 24

Krizantem Sok. No.30
34330 Levent
İstanbul/Turkey
+90 212 283 13 13

www.kmice.com

www.mci-group.com

www.scalamice.com

serenas group

Setur travel
agency

Basogretmen Cad.
Mor Orkide Sk. No:3
Kucukbakkalkoy,
Atasehir/İstanbul
+90 216 594 58 26
www.serenas.com.tr

Saray Mahallesi Site Yolu
Caddesi No: 4/1 34770
Ümraniye/İstanbul
+90 216 554 37 00
www.seturmice.com

Topkon
Zühtüpaşa Mah.
Rıfat Bey Sok. No.24
Kalamış/Kadıköy/İstanbul
+90 216 330 90 20
www.topkon.com

87

88

BUSINESS

Business Hub
of Europe
and Asia

New York, London, Hong Kong, Singapore and
Shanghai. These cities are the leading global business
hubs of the world. Istanbul comes right after them
and continues to raise the standards.


The Global Financial CenteRs Index ranks the
world’s top financial centers. Istanbul’s rank
jumped 9 spots in the report, to 59th place,
according to GFCI’s latest ranking.


Famous writers like
Paul Theroux and
Ernest Hemingway all
said that they gained
their inspiration from
Istanbul.

According to the history of humanity,
international trade was created in
Mediterranean. People traded olive oil, fruits,
textile products and many others by maritime.
As the end point of Eastern Mediterranean,
throughout history, Istanbul has always been
an important industrial port. Today, Turkey
is a member of G20 countries. Istanbul is the
most critical business hub of Turkey. Turkey’s
international trade brings 400 billion dollars
every year, and three out of four businesses
go through Istanbul. This megacity, with a
population of almost 20 million, does business
with 200 different countries of the world.
Istanbul aims to bring 1 trillion dollars from
international trade in the upcoming 10 years.

A Dynamic Soul: Levent

Istanbul transformed majorly
in the 20th century. The city’s
limits expanded over the historical
peninsula and Istanbul spread
through Bosphorus. Levent, one
of the main business districts of
the city, is considered as the face
of this transformation. The name
Levent, a type of soldier (naval
infantry) of the Ottoman Navy,
was given to the neighborhood in
the 18th century. In the early 19th
century, a military compound
was built on the region. The
modern neighbourhood of Levent
was formed in 1947, when a
company chose the Levent area
for constructing a residential
compound. Starting from the
late 1980s and early 1990s, with
many initial projects, Levent
became a popular location for
constructing new skyscrapers,
mostly owned by Turkish banks
and conglomerates. Today, Levent
is the heart of Turkish economy.
The region hosts some of the
tallest buildings of the city and has
evolved into a central business
district.

Skyscrapers of the City

Skyland Istanbul-1 and Skyland Istanbul-2 are mixed-use skyscrapers at the Seyrantepe neighborhood
of Şişli district in Istanbul. They are the tallest buildings in Istanbul and Turkey and 9th tallest buildings
of Europe at 284 m tall. The 65-story buildings feature 830 residences, 504 office spaces, and a five-star
international hotel with 300 rooms and a 550-seat capacity conference hall. The construction of numerous
new mixed-use skyscraper projects are ongoing in the Levent, Şişli and Maslak neighborhoods.


Head-Office of the Business World: Maslak

Maslak is one of the main
business districts and the
new generation financial hub
of Istanbul. Maslak is in direct
competition with the nearby
Levent business district for new
skyscraper projects. The region
used to be a village until 1903s
but now it is one of the most
modern districts of Istanbul and
hosts headquarters of various
global companies.

New Global Financial Center
of the asıan sıde: Ataşehİr

In the past few years, Turkey has moved some of
its public banks and corporations to the Asian Side
of the city, Ataşehir, which hosts the new Istanbul
International Financial Center. The project’s total
budget is 5 billion dollars and aims to add Istanbul
within the top 10 financial centers list. Also,
headquarters of state and private banks and insurance
companies are clustered in Ataşehir.

Co-working Spaces

Recently, start-ups in Istanbul are mostly
preferring to manage their operations from
the co-working spaces within the city. The
most popular co-working offices in Istanbul are
Workinton, Kolektif House and Urban Station. The
spaces can be used as much as you need from 1
hour to a full day.



Leading Congress Destination

A city with a global outlook,
Istanbul is a meeting point
between East and West as
well as being a leading MICE
destination offering unique and
exciting venues.

With its 7 purpose-built
convention centers & 3 exhibition
centers, the city has the capacity
to host every type of event, from
bespoke incentives to meetings
for up to 30,000 pax. Combined
with Istanbul’s historic venues,
palaces, cisterns, high tech
modern venues and more, it
offers meeting planners lots of
options to create truly unique
events.

Halic Congress Center

The Halic Congress Center is a massive complex
which hosted the 5th World Water Forum.
The 102,000-square meter center boasts 16,000
square meters of outdoor area, a seating capacity
ranging from 219 to 3,004 people, five state-of-theart auditoriums, connecting foyer and gallery areas
totaling 9,172 square meters, and 23 multi-purpose
halls with seating capacities ranging from 50 to 850.
Sütlüce Mah. Karaağaç Cad No:19
34445 Beyoğlu / Istanbul
P: +90 212 311 11 11
@: info@halic.com,
W: www.halic.com



Istanbul Congress Center – ICC

Opened during the World Bank – IMF Summit
in 2009, the Istanbul Congress Center covers
more than 15,000 square meters (120.000 sq.
ft.) of exhibition space, which includes a 3555pax auditorium and 80 meeting rooms. Istanbul
Congress Center is an international congress
and event destination, boasting world-class
technological infrastructure, experienced staff,
and a high-quality service it offers to visitors.
Darülbedai Cad. No:3
34367 Harbiye – İstanbul
P: +90 212 373 99 00
F: +90 212 373 99 43
@: sales@iccIstanbul.com
W: www.iccistanbul.com



A magnet for dynamic and
talented people from around
the world, Istanbul is the ideal
congress destination with its
vibrancy, modernity, swathe of
new infrastructure and enviable
geographical position.
With almost 117,199 bed
capacity and 232 five and four
star hotels, Istanbul offers a
variety of options, including
top international and domestic
hotel brands, at a variety of
price points. Istanbul offers
four separate but integratable
meeting and exhibition clusters
in the Airport District, the
Congress Valley, the Golden
Horn and Asian side.

Istanbul Expo Center – IFM

Istanbul Expo Center (IFM), owned by World Trade
Center Istanbul, is the biggest exhibition ground in
Turkey. The center stretches over 162,000 m2 and
the overall rentable area is 98,000 m2 consisting
of 11 exhibition halls.

Yeşilköy, Atatürk Cad. No:5/5,
34149 Bakırköy/Istanbul
P: +90 212 468 52 00
@: info@idtm.com.tr
W: www.idtm.com.tr

The Congress Valley, only at a
walking distance from a wide
range of hotels, restaurants
and attractions, is located
in the city center (Şişli) and
features two main complexes.

Istanbul Lutfi Kirdar International
Convention and Exhibition Centre –
ICEC

Istanbul Lutfi Kirdar – ICEC, features a 1900-pax
auditorium, many meeting rooms, over 7000
square meters (75,347 sq. ft.) of exhibition space,
and 27 multi-functional rooms.

Gümüş Cad. No:4
34367 Harbiye / Istanbul
P: +90 212 373 11 00
@: sales@icec.org
W: www.icec.org


HIDDEN GEMS
OF ISTANBUL

How long does it take to explore a city? If that city is Istanbul,
finding a right answer is not that easy. Istanbul’s famous
attractions are well-known by everyone, here, we wanted to let
you discover some of the hidden gems of the city.


It is rumored that a
Japanese company
offered to clean up the
Golden Horn in return for
the lost treasure hidden
underneath water in
1980s.

The name Balat is probably derived from Greek palation (palace),
from Latin palatium, after the nearby Palace of Blachernae.

Real travelers always visit the popular tourist
attractions of a city at least once, but they
are more curious about the hidden gems and
unknown historical spots of a destination. It is
always a pleasure to discover locally popular
markets and streets of a city or to explore a
forgotten historical area. You will get a lot of
answers from many blogs and websites on
attractions and must-see spots of Istanbul,
but you will probably won’t find the hidden
beauties of the city on that list. Since Istanbul
is an extensive city filled with many interesting
neighborhoods and areas, it is hard to explore
the city in a short period of time. Let’s take a look
at some of the hidden but magnificent gems of
Istanbul…


A Cute Little Seaside Town of Istanbul: Şİle

Şile is located on the Asian
side of the city by the shores
of the Black Sea. It is a laid back
seaside town of Istanbul. There
has been a fishing village here
since 700 BC and a lighthouse
since the Ottoman period. Today,
Şile is a beach resort, popular
with people who want a resort
atmosphere without the expense
of travelling to the Mediterranean
Sea. Şile is about an hour’s drive
from the city and was always
a retreat from the city. During
Turkey’s economic boom of the
1990s, a great many summer
homes and holiday villages were
built for the city’s middle class.
There is a small but sandy beach,
a little harbour of fishing boats,
dense forest behind and a quiet
pleasant atmosphere during the
week. There are a number of bars
and restaurants with sea views,
especially in the little park around
the lighthouse. Şile is also known
for Şile cloth, a crimped-looking,
light, see-through cotton fabric,
made on the Şile coast, sold in
many shops in the town and sent
to the bazaars of Istanbul. There is
a fair to promote Şile cloth in the
town held every summer.

A Historic and Colorful Neighborhood: Balat

Balat is one of the oldest and
most spectacular districts of
Istanbul. When you step foot
along its narrow cobbled streets
and historic buildings, you feel
an atmosphere unlike anywhere
else in Istanbul, and the world.
The district is hidden away from
the city a little bit, set past the
Eminönü along the Golden Horn.
It’s quite close to the metro
stop along the Golden Horn, a
comfortable walking distance.
Once you step inside Balat, it feels
like as you’ve stepped into an
Istanbul of yester year. Perhaps
the most iconic part of Balat is the
district’s colorful houses along
sloping cobbled streets. These
homes are mostly over 50-yearsold, and in some cases are up to
200-years-old. These historic
wooden homes are amongst the
most photographed buildings
in the city, and because of its
popularity many of these streets
now feature cafés and restaurants
for you to stop off at and admire
the setting. The neighborhood
itself is very welcoming. Balat is a
district that has traditionally been
home to minorities in the city,
with many Jewish families and
Greek Orthodox families making it
their homes. The stunning massive
Fener Greek High School is still in
operation here and you can see
it from many different angles all
over the neighborhood. Along the
coast is a Bulgarian church, with
iron castings manufactured in
Vienna and a belfry tower that was
a gift from Russia. In short, this
district is one of the city’s most
diverse and its historic buildings
and residents give you this sense
the second you walk through it.



A Natural Environment Within the City: Kİlyos

Kilyos is a popular seaside resort located in the northern coast of the city, in the Sariyer district.
Kilyos is also named as Kumköy, meaning “sandy village” in Turkish. Kilyos is best-known for its
beautiful sandy beaches, restaurants, summer time entertainment and water sports activities. There is
a 14th-century Genoese castle in the village, which was restored during the era of the Ottoman sultan
Mahmud II, but it is not publicly accessible since it is located in the military zone. At Kilyos, you can
swim, enjoy the water sports, walk inside the forest and eat some seafood. There are public and private
beaches around Kilyos and some of the private beaches are popular with their parties, festivals and
concerts.

Last Remains of Romans: The Valens Aqueduct

The Valens Aqueduct is a Roman aqueduct
which was the major water-providing system
of the Eastern Roman capital of Constantinople.
Completed by Roman Emperor Valens in the late
4th century AD, it was maintained and used by the
Byzantines and later the Ottomans, and remains as
one of the most important landmarks of the city.
The most visible bridge section of the aqueduct
stands in the quarter of Fatih, and spans the valley
between the hills occupied today by the Istanbul
University and the Fatih Mosque. The surviving
section is 921 metres long, about 50 metres
less than the original length. The Atatürk Bulvarı
boulevard passes under its arches.

A Genuine Turkish Bazaar Experience: Women’s Bazaar

Siirt Bazaar, also known as Women’s Bazaar, is
located across Istanbul Manifaturacılar (Textile
Merchant’s) Bazaar. For those who don’t know
this bazaar, this special place located in the heart
of the city may surprise visitors. Local foods from
Siirt, Adıyaman, Mardin, Diyarbakır, Bitlis and Muş
are laid out all around like an exhibition. You
can see herbs you’ve never heard of before and
try wonderful pastries made with these herbs.
If you head toward the honey stands, you can
take your pick from among the wide variety of
tasty sweetness. Though it’s a wonderful spot to
observe local life, the vibrant Women’s Bazaar
isn’t for the faint-hearted. Freshly slaughtered
sheep carcasses swing in the wind and shops
sell dried sheep heads, pungent tulum cheese and
other unusual produce. Most shopkeepers are from the
southeastern corner of Turkey – specifically Siirt – and
the tasty food served at the bazaar’s eateries reflects
this. The bazaar made it into the “Favorite Streets in 12
European Cities” list of New York Times in 2015.



A Sense of Wilderness in the Midst of Istanbul:
Belgrad Forest

Belgrad Forest is located in
the northwest of the city, this
55,000 hectare proliferation of
protected woodland provides
plenty of hiking, mountain biking,
and summer shade for when the
days are hot and the thought
of a crowded beach makes you
squirm. A very popular area
for barbecues, with numerous
picnic spots and even an onsite cafe, you’ll find Belgrad to
be a place of both leisure and
activity. There is a 6 km footpath
that surrounds a central lake
that is a favorite for runners,
while there are also a number of
unmarked trails. If you’re up for
little exploring, there’s a massive
aqueduct near the road wthat
used to be an Ottoman water
supply system that led all the way
to Taksim Square, while you’ll
also encounter the scattered
remains of a community formed
hundreds of years ago by
displaced Serbians from the city
of Belgrade. Getting to and from
the forest may be a little tough
if you don’t have a rental car; a
cab ride is decently cheap from
Haciosman, while buses depart
from various points in Istanbul to
Bahcekoy, which is a moderate
walk from the park entrance.



Belgrad Forest is named
after the thousands of
Serbs that Suleiman the
Magnificent transferred
to Istanbul after the 1521
Siege of Belgrade.



According to the warning of United Nations (UN), we have 11
years left to prevent irreversible damage from climate change.
Istanbul, as a city where green meets with blue, is trying to
take preventive precautions on this issue with its eco-friendly
technologies, zero waste projects and green buildings.



As a result of its location,
Istanbul has a complex
climate that both
carries the properties of
Mediterranean climate
and interacts with the
surrounding climate
zones.

As a metropole with a population of 15 million,
Istanbul has 25 natural parks in total on 50
million m2 area. These parks have bicycle roads,
picnic areas, trekking areas, hand-line fishing
areas and wildlife scenery areas. 9 of them are
on the Asian side and 16 of them are located on
the European side of the city. The city is trying
to develop eco-friendly technologies, create a
natural environment, reduce energy usage and
use minimal non-renewable resources. Istanbul is
focusing on the protection of the global climate
for present and future generations.
Culturally, Turks have a saying that goes like this:
“Even on Judgement day, if you have a plant in
your hand, you should plant it to the ground
before you die.” In Turkey, respecting the nature
and saving it is a part of the culture.

According to the “Top 10 Countries and Regions for LEED Green Building” list of
U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC), Turkey is in the 6th place.

102

GREEN

Clean environment and water

Istanbul built drinking water network lines,
purification plants and barrages for the city in order
to remove the water problem of the city. Melen
Barrage, which is still being constructed, will be
completed in a few years and the city will not have
any problems with water for a very long time. 99
percent of the waste water in Istanbul are purified in
81 different biological purification facilities.

Zero Waste

Istanbul is the largest city in Turkey
and its population continues
to grow constantly. Waste
management is one of the most
important issues in Istanbul and
the city is actively working to keep
it clean. The zero waste project
of Turkey, which emerged as a
waste management philosophy,
envisages the most efficient
use of resources by preventing
waste or minimizing the amount
of waste when it is generated.
The project aims to reduce the
volume of non-recyclable waste.
The project is also listed in the
Environmental Performance Review
of the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development.
The recycling rate is 46% in
the European Union countries
compared with 13% in Turkey. The
project aims to increase that ratio to
35% in Turkey by 2023.

GREEN
Green Buildings

U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC)
created the LEED green building rating
system in 1998 and the certificates have
been provided to buildings ever since. LEED,
or Leadership in Energy and Environmental
Design, is the most widely used green building
rating system in the world. Available for
virtually all building, community and home
project types, LEED provides a framework
to create healthy, highly efficient and costsaving green buildings. LEED certification is a
globally recognized symbol of sustainability
achievement. Every year, USGBC shares the
“Top 10 Countries and Regions for LEED
Green Building” list and last year, Turkey was
in the 6th place. There’s a LEED for every type
of building project and Istanbul’s buildings are
getting greener each and every day.

Eco-friendly
Technologies

Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality
hosts World Cities Congress event in
Istanbul every year. The event focuses
on smart city technologies of the future
and sustainability. On last year’s event,
The Istanbul Electric Tram and Tunnel
Company (IETT) introduced its innovative
shuttle, city’s first self-driving eco-friendly
electric vehicle. This year, the municipality
announced a new recycling project.
Residents of Istanbul are receiving free
credit on their passenger cards in exchange
of bottles and cans. The municipality’s
automated “smart containers” are able
to collect 0.33-, 0.50-, 1- and 1.5-liter
beverage cans and bottles.



R oya lty
of I s ta n b u l :

C at s

“In this city, the ordinary cat lives an extraordinary life. In
Istanbul, the cat is more than just a cat. The cat embodies the
indescribable chaos, the culture, and the uniqueness that is
Istanbul.” Cat Documentary, Ceyda Torun


Istanbul’s royalty feels free to roam the streets
of the city as they like. They live in the city with
us. You can find them relaxing on the chair of
a bohemian café in Cihangir, wandering in the
courtyard of the Blue Mosque, sleeping on the
doorstep of an apartment in Moda or playing
with each other wherever they like. They are in
every corner and people of Istanbul take care of

them by putting out water and food.
Almost everyone in the city is used to living
with the sound of their purring and meowing.
There isn’t a single Istanbul scene without them
in it. Cats are a part of Istanbul’s culture and
they symbolize the hospitality of this city. When
you’re here, feel free to feed and pet them as
much as you like…


Istanbul is always known for its outstanding history;
the city has also been the capital of various sports events.
From soccer to swimming, cycling to basketball.
Let’s explore…

CAPITAL
OF SPORTS
Since Constantine’s gladiators, Istanbul has always
been a city of sports and fandom. Without a
doubt, most attracted branch of sport in Istanbul is
soccer. The city has major big soccer clubs, all are
older than a century, and they have very spectacular
fans. Beşiktaş, Fenerbahçe and Galatasaray all have
impressive stadiums. They have millions of fans
from all around Turkey and derbies between these
teams are very important culturally.
The city also hosted the most unforgettable games
of Champions League and Super Cup finals.
In addition, every year, Istanbul hosts one or more
European or global sports organization such as Final
Four, World Cup or Formula 1 Championship.
In addition, two very special sports events are held
in Istanbul every year: Cross-Continental Swimming
Race and the Istanbul (Eurasia) Marathon.
This city lives and breathes with different types of
sports and every single Istanbulite is passionate
about at least one of them.

Champions League Final will be held in Istanbul on May 30th, 2020. On that weekend,
more than 100,000 fans are expected to take theır seats ın the atatürk olympıc stadıum.


There is an eternal friendship and
rivalry between Istanbul’s three
biggest soccer teams: Beşiktaş,
Fenerbahçe and Galatasaray.
Galatasaray, won the UEFA Super
Cup in 2000, becoming the first
and only Turkish team to win a
major UEFA competition. Also,
Turkish National team ranked
3rd in 2002 world cup.


A World-Class Racetrack: Intercity Istanbul Park

Intercity Istanbul Park, also known
as the Istanbul Racing Circuit is
a motor sports racetrack in Tuzla
district of Istanbul. The racetrack
was inaugurated on 2005 by hosting
the first Grand Prix of Turkey. It has
been called “the best race track in
the world” by Formula One Chief
Executive Bernie Ecclestone. Felipe
Massa has an affinity with this circuit,
with the Brazilian winning three of
the seven Grands Prix held at Istanbul
Park. The racetrack hosted many
international events like MotoGP
World Championship Grand Prix, FIA
World Touring Car Championship,
Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters, Le
Mans Series, the International GT
Open, Formula-G, the World Series
by Renault and the Superbike World
Championship.

First EuroLeague Champion of Turkey!

Turkish Airlines EuroLeague
is managed and organized
as the continent’s premier
men’s basketball competition
by Euroleague Basketball (EB).
Every year, the EuroLeague Final
Four is hosted in a different city.
In 2017, Istanbul hosted the final
four and surprisingly an Istanbul
team, Fenerbahçe, became the
first Turkish team to win the
EuroLeague title. The Turkish
Airlines EuroLeague Final Four 2017
attracted hundreds of journalists
from all around the world to
chronicle the dramatic games and
the great atmosphere of Istanbul.



A Thrilling Competition:
Samsung Bosphorus
Cross-Continental Swimming Race

The Bosphorus CrossContinental Race is an
environmentally respectful
“matchless experience”
which allows thousands of
swimmers from all around
the world to meet in Istanbul
every year. The race starts
in Kanlıca neighborhood on
the Asian side of Istanbul and
ends at Kuruçeşme on the
European side, covering a
distance of 6.5 kilometers (4
miles). The popularity of the
race can be understood from
the fact that the quota for
1,200 foreign swimmers gets
filled in 28 minutes. The race
has a noteworthy presence
in the world calendar of
sports events.

You’ll Never Walk Alone in Istanbul!

Istanbul hosted one of the
most extraordinary finals of the
Champions League on May 25th,
2005. Milan went ahead with 3
goals as the first half of the game
ended. During the second half,
Liverpool also scored 3 goals
and shocked all the ground.
30 minutes of extra time didn’t
change the score and during the
penalty shoot-outs Jerzy Dudek
pulled off one of the greatest
double-saves the world has ever
seen and the cup went to the
home of Beatles. After the game,
most touristic spots of Istanbul,
Sultanahmet and Beyoğlu were
filled with the song “We Are The
Champions” until the next day…
Now, Istanbul was not only an
authentic city for the English, it
was also magical…



Istanbul took its
place in Liverpool’s
team song in Europe
after this victory.



SPORTS

The Magic Continues…

This time, the date is August
14th, 2019. Liverpool and
Chelsea are competing for
UEFA Super Cup. Liverpool was
ahead by 1-0 in the first half but
Chelsea caught up in the second.
Once again, it’s time for the
penalties, history repeats itself
and the cup goes to Liverpool.
Istanbul became a lucky charm
and a memorable destination for
Liverpool fans and it seems like it
will be for many more years…

World’s One and Only Intercontinental Race:
Istanbul Marathon

The Istanbul Marathon (formerly Eurasia
Marathon) is an international athletics event
organized in Istanbul every year since 1979. It is
the only course in the world where the marathon
includes two continents, Asia and Europe, in one
race. The marathon starts on the Asian side of
the city, shortly before the first Bosphorus Bridge,
crosses the bridge giving an outstanding view of
the Bosphorus and Istanbul, passes many amazing
views of historic sites including the Blue Mosque
and Hagia Sophia, and ends in Beşiktaş disctrict in
the European part. Every year, more than 100,000
Istanbul residents and tourists attend the race and it
is listed as Europe’s 17th best marathon.

Rowing in Golden Horn…

Golden Horn is not only a historical tourist
attraction of Istanbul, the district also
hosts many national and international rowing
competitions. Rowing is one of the oldest sports in
the world and it has been a part of Istanbul’s culture
since the Ottoman era. In order for this sports
branch to be known-better, Municipality of Eyüp
is providing rowing, dragon boat racing and sailing
classes for Istanbul residents.



Golden Horn is the
only sea in the world
that can be rowed all
year round.



A Legendary Race around Marmara Sea:
Presidential Cycling Tour of Turkey

Organized traditionally by Turkish
Cycling Federation, Presidential
Cycling Tour of Turkey started in 1963 as
“Marmara Tour,” it gained an international
status for the first time in 1965 and
was taken under the auspices of
Presidential authority in 1966. The tour
was promoted to World Tour category
in 2017 as a unique intercontinental
cycling tour of the world. Every year, the
tour witnesses high-level competition
of world-renowned athletes and
teams. Presidential Cycling Tour of
Turkey reaches a wide access network
throughout the world by means of
live and recorded broadcasts through
national and international prestigious
channels, mainly Eurosport, in more than
120 countries.

2020 UEFA Champions League Final in Istanbul

The 2020 Champions League
final will be played at the
Atatürk Olympic Stadium on
May 30, 2020. It will be the
second time Istanbul hosts the
European club football’s most
important game. In 2005, the
Turkish metropolis hosted one of
the most iconic and epic finals
in history between Milan and
Liverpool. The “final identity,” as
the UEFA called it, features famous
Istanbul landmarks, including the
July 15 Martyrs’ Bridge, previously
the Bosporus Bridge, the Galata
Tower and the Valens Aqueduct.
The 2020 identity is based on an
abstract depiction of the city at
sunset and is inspired “by the rich
colors of the Istanbul sky and the
vivid lights of this bustling city.”



HEALTH TOURISM

A GLOBAL
DESTINATION IN
H EALT H TOURIS M

There are 83 public health corporations, 466 private health centers,
19 public university hospitals, 20 private university hospitals in Turkey.


Istanbul is one of the most
popular medical destinations
because when compared to
others, it allows the patients
to save up to %50-60.
Istanbul provides various quality options & a cutting-edge
technology for medical tourism and in the past few years,
the city became a center of medical tourism.


Medical or health tourism is
one of the ancient tourism
types. Since Ancient Greece,
patients have always looked far
away for their cures. In the past
few years, Turkey in general
became a center of medical
tourism with its cutting-edge
technological medical equipment,
world-class doctors and hospitals
and world renowned hospitality.
Turkey is also one of the world’s
top seven countries for thermal
springs, with about 1,500 natural
hot spring water resources.
According to the Thermal
Health and Tourism Association
(TESTUD), Turkey attracted
nearly 1 million people for health
tourism in 2018. Besides being an
indispensable holiday destination
for tourists, especially those from
Asia, Europe and the Middle East,
Turkey has also seen considerable
growth in health care tourism
in recent years. The number of
health tourists has increased
tenfold in the past decade,
with 75,000 visitors coming for
health reasons in 2008. In 2017,
that number rose to 700,000
medical tourists, according to
the Istanbul International Health
Tourism Association (ISTUSAD).
Health Minister Fahrettin Koca
recently said that Turkey’s revenue
in health tourism has reached
$1.5 billion, and that they aim to
increase this revenue five times by
2030. Receiving qualified service
with low prices caused many
patients from the world to flock
to Turkey, he said. Health tourism
encompasses a wide range of
treatments, from medical tourism
(such as treatment and surgery
in hospitals), thermal tourism
(services such as rehabilitation
and rest in thermal facilities),
elderly and disabled tourism
(long-term stays with social
activities in geriatric treatment
centers).

World countries now recognize
Istanbul as a rising medical
tourism center. Turkey has
become first choice of tourists
because of its good doctors,
easy transportation, high health
technology and location. Istanbul
has become head health center
of Turkey because of its location
between Europe and Asia.
Istanbul, combines its medical
resources as like Wellness, Spa
with five star hotels and gives
qualified and advantage tourism
packages to health tourists.
Tourists’ needs who come to
Turkey for health are met by
specialist health personnel and
agency authorities.

The quality of service of Turkey’s health institutions are approved by
international organizations such as JCI (Joint Comissions International),
JCAOH (Joint Comission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations) and
ISO (International Organization for Standardization).

Hair Transplant

World-class treatment at affordable prices make Istanbul a top
destination for people from European and Middle Eastern countries
looking to get hair transplants, an important component of the country’s
health tourism sector. The top choice for hair transplants in Europe,
Turkey welcomes people from Middle East, Gulf countries and European
countries for hair transplant operations. The quality of services and
affordable prices has enabled Turkey to be ranked third in hair transplant
procedures worldwide. Turkey offers world class medical facilities at
affordable prices for a hair transplant procedures which cost around
$15,000 in the U.S. and most European countries, and $2,000 to $4,000 in
Turkey. In hair transplantation surgery, two surgical techniques — Follicular
Unit Transplantation (FUT) and Follicular Unit Extraction (FUE) are widely
used to remove hair from a patient’s scalp. In the FUE technique, widely
implemented in Turkey, each hair graft is removed from the donor site one
by one using a punch tool. The advantage of the technique is that scarring
is avoided, while the FUT technique leaves a permanent scar on the donor
and recipient sites. Located in the middle of Europe, Asia, Middle East and
Africa, Turkey, she said, reserves a huge potential to boost the market with
its geographically significant location. The references of patients bring
most of the others for hair transplants in Turkey.


Aesthetic Operations

Bariatric Surgery

Laser Eye Surgery

When it comes to health
tourism, most of the
tourists are coming to Istanbul
for aesthetic surgery, such
as nose surgery, eyelid, face
and abdominal lifting and
liposuction. Approximate prices
in Istanbul are below most of
the European countries. Plastic
surgery is one of the top forms
of medical tourism worldwide,
and Istanbul has made major
strides in developing its medical
tourism sector by implementing
policies that effectively facilitate
the process for tourists.
Hundreds of thousands of
medical tourists, particularly
from the Middle East, visit
Turkey for plastic surgeries.

If you cannot lose weight
through weight loss methods
such as diet, sports etc. surgical
operations that provide
permanent weight loss are
called bariatric surgery. With the
progress of technology and the
development of new methods,
the success rate of today’s
obesity surgeries is very high.
Compared to the old obesity
surgeries, the complications
after a surgery have decreased
in great extent and the healing
period has shortened. Obesity
and its comorbidities are among
the primary challenges faced by
health systems globally. Obesity
is rapidly becoming a problem
in Turkey, as well. Istanbul has
experienced hospitals and health
centers, offering bariatric surgery
for all ages.

Laser, which is the most
commonly used method
around the world for refractive
surgeries, is also used for the
treatment of myopia, hyperopia
and astigmatism. Customized
intraocular lens replacement
surgeries are performed for
people who are not suitable
for laser surgery. Many patients
choose to have their laser
eye surgery in Istanbul due to
the level of experience and
quality of service. The prices
are much better compared to
other countries. Most of the
medical care packages provided
for foreigners usually cover
accommodation and vacation
costs.



Psychologically speaking, it is
very important for children’s
emotional, physical, mental and
social development to spend
quality time with their families.
They should see, hear, feel,
touch and taste anything and
everything until they become
adults.

ENTERTAINING

KIDS IN ISTANBUL

Istanbul provides kids a lot OF entertaining options like a theme park,
an aquarium, entertainment facilities, amusement parks and lots of
museums.


When it comes to children, Istanbul can
become a playground easily. The city provides
a lot of fun and joyful entertainment options
for families and children…

Istanbul is a kid and family friendly destination
which has various suitable venue and museum
options for you and your children. The history
and story of Istanbul will enrich their imagination
and fulfill their expectations. Turkey is one of the
few countries in the world which has an official
“Children’s Day”. This national day, April 23
Children’s Day, in Turkey is a unique event and it
is one of the public holidays. The founder of the
Turkish Republic, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, presented
April 23 to all the world’s children to emphasize that
they are successor of the future. During the War
of Independence, Grand National Assembly met
in Ankara and laid down the foundations of a new,
independent, secular and modern republic. Atatürk
started his task of establishing the institutions of the
new state. Over the next eight years, Atatürk and
his followers adopted sweeping reforms to create
a modern Turkey. In unprecedented moves, he
dedicated the sovereignty day to the children and
entrusted in the hands of the youth the protection
of this sovereignty and independence. Every year,
the children in Turkey celebrate this “Sovereignty
and Children’s Day” as a national holiday. Schools
participate in week-long ceremonies marked by
performances in all fields in large stadiums watched
by the entire nation. Among the activities on this
day, the children send their representatives to
replace state officials and high ranking civil servants
in their offices. The importance of April 23 as a
special day of children has been recognized by
the international community. UNICEF decided to
recognize this important day as the International
Children’s Day.


Isfanbul Theme Park

Isfanbul is one of the best
theme parks in Istanbul as well
as in Europe and offers great
attractions for both kids and
adults. It has been operating since
2013, it is Turkey’s first theme park
and located at the Eyup district.
Isfanbul is a huge complex that
combines theme park, shopping,
entertainment and exhibition
centers in one place. The complex
covers an area of 600.000 m2 and
the shopping center of Isfanbul
houses more than 200 stores.
The facility was listed within the
“World’s Top 10 Theme Parks”
list and gained European Star
Award 2016 amongst the 800
theme parks in the world. You can
discover the wild and mysterious
world of Jungle Istanbul and see
hundreds of exotic animals inhabit
together within a space of 2500
m2. The Dungeon allows you to
experience the Tunnel of Horror
(Dark Ride). Be sure that you
would like to see what’s waiting
for you around the corner and in
the depths of the tunnel. Safari
allows you to be a hero, not just a
spectator. This is an adventure in
the dark. Prepare yourself for the
surprises along the way!



Istanbul Toy Museum

Turkish poet and author Mr.
Sunay Akın has opened the first
and the only private toy museum
of Turkey on April 23rd, 2005. This
opening date was chosen in order to
celebrate the National Sovereignty
and Children’s Day. Sunay Akın
had noticed a toy museum in
Nürnberg-Germany in 1990 and
laid the foundations of the Istanbul
Toy Museum with a toy horse he
purchased from an antique shop in
Germany. He expanded his collection
for over 15 years and has collected
7000 antique toys. Meanwhile he
has made serious efforts to convert
the historical villa, belonging to his
family, into a cozy museum. 4000
toys are on display in this four-floor
museum located in Göztepe,
Istanbul. The oldest is a miniature
violin manufactured in France in
the year 1817. A doll made in the
United States in the 1820’s, a set
of marbles also from United States
dating back to the 1860’s, tin toys
from Germany, plus porcelain dolls
are amongst other items of the
extensive collection. The interior
décor and displays were arranged
by a professional stage designer.
Each room resembles a different
theater stage. For instance, when
you enter the gallery of space
toys, you encounter hining stars
overhead, whereas miniature train
sets are exhibited in a genuine
train compartment. Istanbul Toy
Museum tells the history of dreams
and science with the language
of toys. While the stories of toys
present visitors a history of the
world, it opens the doors leading
back to their past.



Istanbul Aquarium

In comparison to other
aquariums of its class
containing fish species living
in the world’s seas, Istanbul
Akvaryum is the newest with
its travel route, schematization,
interactivity, rainforest and
cutting-edge technology. The
venue is located in Florya district
and holds a leading position
among worldwide aquariums
thanks to its volume, variety of
fish species, and the activities on
travel routes. Istanbul Akvaryum
has approximately 1,500 species,
17.000 land and sea creatures in
total. The visitors, by following a
geographical route, travel on a
route that hosts 17 themes and 1
rainforest going from the Black
Sea towards the Pacific.
In theming of the spaces, there
appear cultural, geographical,
historical and architectural
properties of each space with
suitable decorative elements,
interactive games, movies, and
visual graphics by which details
about the region are provided.
Sound and lighting systems of
each space have been arranged
in conformity with this theming.
All living creatures in Istanbul
Akvaryum continue to live in the
conditions as nearest as possible
to those of their habitat.


Miniaturk

Miniaturk is a showcase of
Turkey with the slogan of “A
Small Model of a Big Country”.
Miniatürk, bringing together the
rich architectural heritage of the
civilizations that had ruled and
left their marks on this ancient
land from ancient ages to Rome,
Byzantine, Seljuk Empire and
Ottoman Empire, was opened
on May 2nd, 2003. 135 models in
total, 62 from Istanbul, 60 from
Anatolia and 13 from Ottoman
territory outside of Turkey, that
were selected among thousands
of architectural works based on
their reputations. All models are
1/25 of their real size. Miniaturk
is not limited to Turkey and
Turkish culture. It carries the
life experiences of the nearby
geography, including the values
that give Anatolia its character.
On one side, you can see the
caravanserais, social complexes,
madrasas, bridges, stations, piers,
castles, city walls, tombs, mosques,
churches, synagogues, palaces,
mansions, obelisks, monuments
and sculptures; on the other
side, you can see unique natural
formations from fairy chimneys
to Pamukkale. Also, 2 of the 7
wonders of the ancient ages,
Artemis Temple and Halicarnassus
Mausoleum, which were built in
Anatolia and do not exist now, are
displayed at the venue. The total
area of Miniatürk is 60.000 square
meters. Every detail has been
carefully designed to ensure that
visitors have a quality experience
while having fun in Miniaturk
including the 15.000 square meters
area where the models are located
as well as Panaromic Victory
Museum and Istanbul Crystal
Museum, parking area for 300 cars,
restaurant, cafeteria, gift shop,
exhibition hall, outdoor show area,
children’s playground, ferryboat,
remote controlled boat, train, tale
tree, mini stadium with 4 biggest
teams, chess hall and labyrinth
area, Turkey-Istanbul simulation
helicopter tour.
Miniaturk is a great tourist
attraction for adults and children
and an ideal place for those who
want to experience a fabulous and
quick tour of Turkey.



KIDZANIA

KidZania Istanbul is located
within the Akasya Shopping
Mall, in the Ünalan district of
the city, on the Asian side of
Istanbul. KidZania is one of the
fastest growing kid’s interactive
entertainment brands in the
world. It is an interactive kids’
city combining inspiration, fun
and learning through realistic
role-play for children 2-14. Kids
independently explore a kid-sized
city with over 100 exciting careers
that they can try. Fueled by a
child’s natural desire to create,
explore and collaborate,
KidZania is equal parts
entertainment and education,
making it one of the most
progressive family entertainment
concepts in the world today.
Through ultrarealistic role-play,
children learn about different
careers, the inner-workings of a
city and the concept of managing
money. Each experience is
designed to empower kids, giving
them the confidence to be their
best selves, and inspiration to be
great global citizens. KidZania has
become a global phenomenon
with numerous locations
throughout the world.

LEGOLAND DISCOVERY CENTRE

Legoland Discovery Centre is located
within Forum Istanbul Shopping Mall,
in the Bayrampaşa district of Istanbul.
The venue has 15 LEGO build & play
zones and 2 rides. It has an event area
allows your children to play with other
children and join building activities.
The first MINILAND allows children to
explore and get to know the important
artifacts of Istanbul and the world.
The center has a LEGO 4D cinema,
a creative workshop, a LEGO Duplo
Farm, a LEGO shop and a coffee shop.
The venue allows children to build and
test their creations and if they want,
they can have a factory tour. Legoland
Discovery Centre has over 5 million
LEGO bricks under one roof and it is a
real playground for your children and
yourself!



Throughout most of its history,
Istanbul has ranked among the
largest cities in the world. By
500 CE, Constantinople had
somewhere between 400,000
and 500,000 people and the
city became world’s largest.

THE
HEART OF
TECH AND
DIGITAL WORLD

Istanbul is among the top 10 cities when looking at the top 500 startups, selected
among 4,500 applicants, at the Hello Tomorrow Global Challenge,
a world-renowned science and tech startup competition.



Istanbul is a modern city which uses forward-thinking
and innovative efforts in technology, architecture and
city planning to become one of the most high-tech cities
of the world. The city hosts many tech events every year
and is the home of countless digital start-ups.

Istanbul is the most crowded city and economic,
cultural and historic center of Turkey. The city
is also the home of many mega projects like
the new Bosphorus Bridge and Istanbul Airport.
These investments help the development of
Istanbul, but they also increase its population.
Istanbul has started to apply some smart city
initiatives using big data to ensure sustainable
development and increase quality of life for its
citizens. It is true that, as a smart city, Istanbul
needs more initiatives. The city is trying to
build a high-tech infrastructure and adapt a
digital understanding. It is already impossible
to stay away from technology in Istanbul.
These technologies ensure that the needs
of both citizens and managers are met more
efficiently in areas that involve urban life, such as
transportation, administration and environment.


Tech Events of Istanbul
Teknofest
Istanbul:

Teknofest Istanbul Aerospace
and Technology Festival
is organized by the Turkish
Technology Team Foundation
(T3) to showcase Turkey’s rapid
advance in technology and to
promote technology advances
as a national cause. The festival
is supported by organizations
that play a critical role in national
technology development in
aviation, space and technology.
As a part of the festival, many
competitions on various subjects
are held. The teams participating
in the competition are expected
to design and produce their own
technology projects. Unbelievable
future technologies are being
showcased at Teknofest Istanbul
every year.

Istanbul
Informatics
Summit:

Istanbul Informatics Summit has
been setting the technology
and informatics agenda of Turkey
since 2000. The summit also
holds meetings all around Turkey
throughout the year in order to
keep up with the professionals.

Istanbul
Informatics
Congress:

The first scientific meeting on
informatics was held in 1976
under the title of Informatics
Association of Turkey (TBD) 1st
National Informatics Congress
and in 1995 it convened nationally
for the 12th time. The congress
is being organized for the last 45
years and focuses on Industry 4.0.



Hub of eCommerce

Informatics Industry Association
(TÜBİSAD) announces the
“eCommerce in Turkey Market
Definition and Sizing Report” every
year. According to the reports, the
size of the eCommerce market
in Turkey was $12.5 billion in
2018, a near 8% increase from
the year prior and an over 20%
increase since 2016. The largest
sub-sector contributing to this
growth is travel & vacations, up
from $4.1 in 2017 to $4.8 billion
last year. The average growth
rate over the last 5 years has
been 12%. eCommerce makes
up 4.1% of total retail, below the
average for developing countries
but a marked improvement since
2013, when it was only 1.9%. The
market size for goods that can be
purchased online only is larger
than that for goods with multichannel sales.

Microsoft Technology Center

The first new generation Microsoft
technology center of Middle East and
Africa region was launched in Istanbul on June
2019. The new center will meet the needs of
domestic and international markets through
new generation technologies to be produced
in various fields, like agriculture, production,
health, energy, automotive, finance and retail.
The goal is to make Turkey to become one
of the main countries of new technologies
such as digital transformation and artificial
intelligence. Microsoft also aims to make
Turkey an attraction center for technology
and to strengthen the country in technology
tourism.

Webrazzi Summit

Turkey’s most influential internet
conference Webrazzi Summit
hosts the biggest brands of the
tech world, start-up companies
and leading names of the industry
every year.



Apps of the City

If you’re living or visiting a
metropolitan city like Istanbul,
transportation is mostly a
big problem for you. Let us
suggest you some of the local
apps we use to make our lives
easier. Istanbul Metropolitan
Municipality’s mobile traffic app
“IBB Cep Trafik” allows you to
follow the roads live to check
the situation of traffic and
Google Maps and Yandex Maps
are easy to use for drivers of the
city. If you decide to use public
transportation, subway app of
the city “Metro Istanbul” allows
you to check the schedule. If
you’re going to take the bus,
“Mobiett” app lets you see the
closest bus stops and follow
all buses. “Ispark” app is also a
life-saver for drivers because it
allows you to see the parking
areas all around the city.

Free Wi-Fi to All!

If you are a traveler, it is vital for
you to have Wi-Fi on your phone.
When you come to Istanbul, you
don’t have to worry about a thing.
You can find free Wi-Fi in most of
the tourist attractions like Taksim
Square, Istiklal Street, Sultanahmet
Square, Beşiktaş Square, Kadıköy
neighborhood and more. You just
have to log in with your mobile
phone number and voila!

The New Generation Idea Hub:
Teknopark İstanbul

Teknopark Istanbul is a science
and technology park which
is being developed by the Under
Secretariat for Defense Industries
and the Istanbul Chamber of
Commerce to contribute to
Turkey’s technology development
capacity for local and international

entrepreneurs. Teknopark Istanbul
hosts 1,350 national projects
which are developed by 280
companies. The goal is to have
1000 companies under a million
m2 area and to provide 10 billion
dollars of added value until the
year 2023.


INFORMATION

ISTANBUL

38th most visited city in the world 
bridges between 2 continents

airports

imperial palaces
dozens of summer palaces and mansions

empires


historical bazaars





ICONIC VENUES

Istanbul, the magnificent city of marvels,
is filled with historical, religious, cultural,
political and social iconic structures and venues.

THE CITY
OF ICONS

The Panorama 1453 Museum of History is the world’s first
full-panoramic museum.



“Pera (from the Greek word for
“across”) was used to describe
the area between the Golden
Horn and the Bosphorus, but
now the official name of the
area is Beyoğlu.”

As one of the most charismatic sea roads of
the world, the Bosphorus itself is an icon
of Istanbul, Europe and Asia. The structures
like the ancient walls of the city, Golden Horn
and Hagia Sophia are enough to be symbols

on their own. However, the city also has some
cultural and social iconic venues which are
as effective to Istanbul’s being as their older
brothers and sisters. Now, we invite you to
their dreamy world…


ICONIC VENUES

The Ayasofya
Hürrem Sultan Hamam

The Ayasofya Hurrem Sultan
Hamam is located in the
treasured historical peninsula,
between the Blue Mosque and
the Hagia Sophia. The facility has
three different sections; Turkish
bath, Mihri Restaurant and café.
The Ayasofya Hurrem Sultan
Hamam is the biggest historical
hamam in Turkey and was
designed and built by Mimar
Sinan, the chief Ottoman
architect. It was built at the
request of Hurrem Sultan
(Roxelana), the wife of Sultan
Suleiman the Magnificent in the
16th century (1556-1557 AD). It
was built where the ancient public
baths of Zeuxippus (100-200 AD)
used to stand. The hamam was
restored according to its original
features with a huge investment.
The facility reopened in 2011 with
the brand name of
“Ayasofya Hurrem Sultan Hamam”.
The hamam which is located
in the middle of Sultanahmet
Square is a holy shrine just like its
neighbors. It is a shrine of healing
and purification with water
which is a part of an extensive
culture… This spiritual and
physical purification shrine where
Ottoman soul is presented with
modern needs has been receiving
a lot attention since the day it is
restored.
The Ayasofya Hurrem Sultan
Hamam is a pioneer within the
other Turkish baths with its
luxurious and glorious service
understanding. The hamam
allows its guests from all around
the world to experience a Sultanlike day.

An Enchanting
Architecture!

The structure belongs to the
classical period Ottoman
bath architecture with its
double bath shape and 75
meters length. It opened a new
era in Turkish Bath architecture
and has the title of being the
first structure where women
and men sections are on the
same axis. At the Ayasofya
Hurrem Sultan Hamam, trained
expert bath attendants, rubbers,
masseurs and masseuses
provide their exclusive services.
Prepare to be born again and
stay healthy on the marble
bath basins while enjoying the
historic domes of the hamam.



Keyf-i Hamam with Judas Tree Scent

According to the Ottoman
archives, Judas tree flower
was Hürrem Sultan’s favorite
and after her Turkish baths,
she received Judas tree scent
oil massages. This tradition
continues at the Ayasofya
Hurrem Sultan Hamam. All
the packages at the hamam
start with a personal care
kit consisting of a specially
designed Ottoman-style goldplated basin, bath-gloves (kese),
natural olive oil soap and other
Sultan-worthy accessories. In
these elite packages, depending
on the package you chose, you
will enjoy the traditional body
scrubbing and relaxing bubble
wash ritual, Judas tree scent oil
aromatherapy massage, body
care rituals, clay and peeling
applications. Feel free to choose
any of the 4 different rituals and
4 different massage services.
Hamam culture is an
important representative of
cleanness, healing, purification,
entertainment and social
sharing. Hamam tradition has
been reinterpreted for the
modern culture in the Ayasofya
Hurrem Sultan Hamam.

This historical “spiritual and
physical shrine” which served to
Sultans, carries on the Ottoman
soul harmonized with the
modern needs. The hamam
presents a Sultan-worthy day in
this enchanting atmosphere to
its guests by using the purifying
power of the culture.


The Panorama 1453 Museum of History

The Panorama 1453 Museum of
History is a marvelous venue
which portrays the historical
process of the conquest of
Istanbul and allows its visitors
to relive that day. The museum
was established by Istanbul
Metropolitan Municipality in 2009
and holds the title of ‘the world’s
first full-panoramic museum’. The
Panorama 1453 Museum of History
has two main sections. The first
section starts with the entrance
and goes through the panoramic
picture. What differs the museum
from other panoramic museums is
this picture which was applied onto
a hemisphere of 38 m diameter.
The interior of the hemisphere is
covered by the picture. It is 2350
cubic meters and allows visitors
to observe it from all aspects and
directions. The picture creates a
depth perception and as soon as
the visitors see it, they are not able
to perceive the real dimension with
their eyes. This is an unforgettable
museum which creates a unique
experience for everyone. Don’t
forget to add The Panorama 1453
Museum of History on your list!

Flower Passage “Çİçek Pasajı” With No Florists

Çiçek Pasajı “Flower Passage” is one of
the most famous and popular food &
beverage venues of Istanbul which hosts
many seafood restaurants. The history of the
passage is another story. An Ottoman-Greek
banker, Christakis Zografos, built a new type
of building called “Citè de Pera” in 1876.
The building/bazaar had 24 shops designed
in Parisian style, which was trendy at those
times, and 18 luxurious apartments over the
shops. In 1908, the ownership of the building
was transferred to the Grand Vizier Mehmed
Said Pasha, after a while florists began to
settle within the passage and its name was
turned into the “Flower Passage”. After 1940,
restaurants took place in the passage; and
this gradually moved apartment owners and
florists to other places but the name “flower”
(çiçek) remained. The restaurants within Çiçek
Pasajı reflects the traditional Turkish cuisine &
seafood cuisine and the passage is definitely
one of the must-visit places in Istanbul.



Esma Sultan Mansion

The mansion took its name after
Esma Sultan, the daughter of
the 32nd Ottoman ruler, Sultan
Abdülaziz. The fabulous and
historical mansion witnessed
many events and figures over
time. When Esma Sultan died in
1899, Abdul Hamid II gave the
mansion to his daughter Cemile
Sultan. In 1915, the mansion
was claimed from the Ottoman
Empire, and in succession, was
used as a Greek school in 1918
and it became a tobacco depot
in 1922. In 1975, the mansion
suffered a very big fire and the
only thing remained was its
exterior walls. In the early 90s,
a hotel group purchased Esma
Sultan Mansion and rebuilt the
building. Its original character
and floor plan was preserved, as it
adopted a new cultural identity. In
2001, in line with Philip Robert’s
project, the building underwent
renovations from within, gaining
a sturdy, yet classy iron and glass
interior. This renovation allowed
the mansion to remain open all
year-round.


A Fairytale Land: the Çemberlİtaş Hamam

Çemberlitaş Hamam is a
historical Turkish bath which
was constructed by Sinan the
Architect (Mimar Sinan). The
hamam has been working since
1584, the day it was opened.
It is located on Çemberlitas
Square on Divanyolu Street. The
Çemberlitas Hamam was planned
as a double bath consisting
of two identical, side-by-side
facilities. The bath has 38 washing
stalls. The plan of the hot area
is unique, as it does not entirely
conform to traditional layouts.
This space is shaped like a square
on the outside, but the inner
dimensions are in the shape of a
circle formed of twelve columns,
becoming a twelve-cornered
polygon. The hamam is one of
Sinan’s latest works and his long
experience and great skill allowed
him to combine functionality,
elegance and tranquility without
abandoning his basic style that
is devoid of overly decorated
elements. The architecture of
Çemberlitaş Hamam remains a
focal point for Turkish and foreign
researchers, photographers,
filmmakers, media professionals
and students.


Hacopulo Passage

This little passage is one of
the hidden gems of Beyoğlu,
İstiklal Street, with little cafés and
shops selling souvenirs, it’s maybe
the cutest place to sip a cup of
Turkish tea anywhere in the city.
In 1871, merchant Hacopulo’s
passage-way had houses on the
upper floors and shops on the
lower floor, and this original design remains intact up to the present day. The narrow façade of the
arcade on the İstiklal side displays
neoclassical features, while the
structures facing the inner courtyard are more neo-Renaissance
in style.

Beykoz Kundura
Factory

As an industrial cultural
heritage, Beykoz Kundura is
serving the creative industry as an
event venue and a set for filming.
The building was founded as a
tanning yard.
It participated in the International
Paris Fair, which was difficult
to enter at the time, and Expo
Universelle. After that, it won
a medal for its manufacturing
plant in the International Vienna
Fair. In the 90s, the building was
operating as Sümerbank Leather
Shoe Factory. Since 2010, Beykoz
Kundura is being used as a natural
stage for filming with its unusual
architecture and themed-areas.


Women’s helpline: 183

ELECTRICITY: 220 volt, 50 cycle. Most hotels
have a receptacle with 110 volts.
Socket type is standart European two-pin.

CHANGING MONEY
Pharmacies
Pharmacies are open Monday
to Saturday from 09:00 to
19:30. Most are closed on
Sundays, but there is always
one pharmacy in an area open
24 hours.



Foreign Exchange offices, which
are known as “döviz bürosu” can
be found throughout the country.
Operating hours are mostly Monday
to Friday, from 09:00 to 17:00. In the
arrivals section of Istanbul Airport
and Sabiha Gökçen Airport, there
are 24 hour Exchange offices. Also
the Exchange offices located in
shopping malls and touristic areas
are open later and on Saturdays.

BUSINESS AND
BANKING HOURS:
Offices and banks are
generally open 09.00 to 17.00
Mondays to Fridays, and close
for lunch 12.00 to 13.30.
US Dollars and Euros are accepted in Turkish
highly touristic districts like Sultanahmet and Taksim but rates are often
better.

DEMORGRAPHICS:
Istanbul is the largest populated
city of Turkey with a population
of 14.7 million.

CURRENCY

The Turkish lira is the official
currency of Turkey. Bank notes
come in denominations of 5,
10, 20, 50, 100 and 200 TL.
Coins come in the amounts of
50 Kuruş , 5 Kuruş , 10 Kuruş  and 25 Kuruş and 1 lira.

CREDIT CARDS
Credit cards are widely used and
accepted. Visitors can use their
Visa, Mastercards, Amex and Diner’s.



LOCAL TIME
UTC / GMT + 2 hours



OFFICIAL HOLIDAYS:

April 23rd: National
Sovereignty and Children’s
Day.
May 19th: The Youth
and Sports Day.
August 30th: Victory Day.
October 29th: Republic Day.
1st of May: Worker’s Day.
Ramadan: 31 July - 3 August (only for 2020)
Eid Al-Adha: 24-26 May (only for 2020)
VISAS:
To enter into Turkey visas
are required but most of the
visas can be purchased for 10
Euro or 20 dollar at Turkey’s
airports or border gates.
the information of visas is
changeable, please contact the
visa information for foreigners on
Turkish Foreign Ministry website.
www.mfa.gov.tr

Turkey’s electronic online visa
application system offers to its
appicants a comfortable and
practical way to obtain visa.
www.evisa.gov.tr

NATURE & CLIMATE:
İstanbul is a city where four
seasons can be experienced.
Spring and autumn are two
unpredictable seasons with
a range from chilly to warm.

İstanbul’s telephone service has two
area codes, one for the Anatolian
side and one for the European. If
the land line you need to call is
on the other side you must also
include its area code (0216 for the
Anatolian side and 0212 for the
European side).
Turkey’s country code is 90.

The average winter weather
is between 5 C and 9 C.
During the summers average
temperature is between 18 C
and 28 C. The hottest months
are July and August while the
coldest months are January
and February.

HOSPITALS
In Istanbul, you can find worldclass hospitals and medical
facilities. Many doctors in Turkey
speak English. In an emergency,
foreigners who do not have
social security insurance can go
to any hospital, where they will
not be charged.

POST OFFICE
Post Offices and the Postal Service
in Turkey are generally abbreviated
to PTT.
(www.ptt.gov.tr)

PRACTICAL
TURKISH
Hello
Merhaba (mehr hah bah)
How are you?
Nasılsın? (na suhl suhn)
Fine, thank you
İyiyim, teşekkürler
(ee yee yeem teh shek ür lerr)
What is your name?
Adın ne? ( ad uhn ne)
My name is___
Adım ___ (Ad uhm___)
Nice to meet you
Memnun oldum
(mem noon oll doom)
Please
Lütfen (Luet fen)
Thank you
Teşekkür ederim
(teh shek uer eh der emm)
You’re welcome
Bir şey değil
( bir shey de yeel)
Yes
Evet (eh vet)
No
Hayır (hah yuhr)
Excuse me?
Bakar mısınız?
(bah kar muh suh nuhz)
Excuse me? (begging pardon)
Afedersiniz (af air dair sin niz)
I’m sorry
Özür dilerim
(ö zuer dil air rim)
Goodbye
Hoşçakalın (hsh cha kaluhn)
Goodbye
Güle güle (guele guele)
Good morning
Günaydın (guen eye duhn)
Good afternoon
Tünaydın (tuen eye duhn)
Good day
İyi günler (e yee guen ler)
Good evening
İyi akşamlar (e yee ak aham lar)
Good night
İyi geceler (e yee ge jay ler)
Good night (to sleep)
İyi uykular (e yee yoo ku lar)
Welcome
Hoşgeldin (hosh gel din)
I don’t understand
Anlamıyorum (an la muh yor uhm)
Where is the touilet?
Tuvalet nerede?
(too va let ner eh de?



Experiences with

#oneistanBul
Follow @oneistanbul

Royal Limousine & Luxury Services
Our company has been providing services in the luxury car rental industry since
2005. We are one of Istanbul’s most outstanding limousine service companies.
High quality service, comfort, trust and professionalism are the top priorities for us.
We provide business trips, VIP services, transfers, event visits, city tours, wedding
and sightseeing tours with our premium segment Mercedes cars.

Kaptan Paşa Mah. Darulaceze Cad. No:31A Blok Kat:6 Daire:61 Bilaş İş Merkezi Şişli/İstanbul
90 (212) 220 01 61 - info@royallimousine.com.tr
Mobile phone numbers: English +90 532 473 42 61 – Russian +90 530 761 94 82
www.royallimuousine.com.tr